WELCOME TO THE WEDNESDAY, MAY
17TH TWO THOUSAND TWENTY THREE
ELECTRONIC MEETING THE END
OF THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT THIS MEETING SIMILARLY
TO AN IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ZOOME ONLY TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE
CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE THREE
SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND
ENTER A MEETING I'D NUMBER NINE
THREE FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE
TWO NINE ZERO SEVEN OR JOIN VIA
THE SAME LINK.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICES
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON CTM JANUARY 19.
>> RIGHT NOW CHRIS IF YOU WOULD
PLEASE DO THE ROLL CALL NOW I
RECEIVED REGRETS FROM
COMMISSIONER MARGOLIS WHO WILL
NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND PLEASE
STAY HERE AND FROM WHERE YOU'RE
DIALING WHEN YOUR NAME IS
CALLED COMMISSIONER HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER ECKMANN
HERE ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER
BOVON DISCRIMINATION
COMMISSIONER HAUTAMKI, YOU'RE
FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
>> OK, HERE IN AN HOUR
COMMISSIONER KAYLA INFOMANIA
COMMISSIONER KLIMAN
,
COMMISSIONER LEIGH, YOU'RE FROM
NEW YORK.
OK, COMMISSIONER ANDERSON HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER HAAS HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
THERE ARE HUTCHINSON HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR.
LIEUTENANT MIKE SCHERBA HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR AND WITH THAT WE
HAVE QUORUM.
THANK YOU.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
AGENDA TODAY APPROVAL OF THE
AGENDA AND APPROVAL THE
MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA?
>> RIGHT.
SEEING NONE THEIR MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
PRESENTED MOVE BY MEGGAN
SEGMENT BY DARMA.
THEY LOOK OTHERS IN FAVOR
OF THE MOTION.
PLEASE RAISE YOUR HAND OR SAY
IN YOUR POST RAISE YOUR HAND.
SAY YES.
ALL RIGHT BECAUSE CONSENT
AGENDA IS APPROVED.
NOW OUT TO THE PUBLIC COMMENT
SECTION.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK UP TO THREE
MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL TO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND FOUR
MEETING AT NUMBER NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO
NINE ZERO SEVEN FOUR CONNECT
VIA ZERO MISDESCRIBED ON THE
AGENDA CITY STAFF WITH CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND ONE
BY ONE USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF OUR PHONE NUMBER OR
THE PERSONAL ZOOM ID IN ORDER
TO ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR
HAND TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE RAISED
HAND BUTTON AND ZOOM HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE
HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK
WITH SPEAKING.
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA
MUTE ANY TELEVISION OR
BACKGROUND SOUND SO THAT WE MAY
HEAR YOU CLEARLY.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE COMMENTS.
ALL RIGHT.
DO WE HAVE ANY HANDS OR OR IT
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE IT.
YOU SEEN ANYONE?
>> I DO NOT SEE ANY HANDS
RAISED WHILE WE GIVE FOLKS A
MOMENT TO SEE IF THEY WANT TO
SPEAK.
I DO WANT TO HIGHLIGHT THERE
WERE FOUR EMAILS INCLUSIVE
OF ATTACHMENTS IN THE WRITTEN
COMMUNICATIONS THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION ONE
OF WHICH INCLUDED AN ATTACHMENT
FROM THE DDA INCLUDING A REPORT
FOR THEIR PEOPLE FRIENDLY
STREETS OUTCOMES REPORT.
SO THAT WAS UPLOADED I THINK
MONDAY TUESDAY THAT WAS MY
FAULT FOR NOT INCLUDING IT
EARLIER.
SO MY APOLOGIES.
I DIDN'T WANT TO DRAW YOUR
ATTENTION FOR YOU OPEN THE
PACKET ON FRIDAY.
THERE ARE A COUPLE ADDITIONAL
ATTACHMENTS SINCE FRIDAY WHEN
POSTED IT LOOKS LIKE BY THE
WAY, MARLEE'S IN THE A I LOOK
THROUGH THAT REPORT THE REPORT
THIS AFTERNOON AND I STRONGLY
ENCOURAGE EVERYONE THAT THERE'S
A LOT OF GOOD INFORMATION IN
THERE.
ALL RIGHT.
LOOKS LIKE YOU'VE GOT ONLY
HAMALA.
ALL RIGHT.
I DON'T SEE ANYONE ELSE OR
ANYONE FOR PUBLIC COMMENT.
ALL RIGHT.
SO WITH THAT I THINK WE CAN GET
RIGHT INTO BUSINESS.
>> RAYMOND, FIRST UP, THE
GRANGER STATE TO PACARD TRAFFIC
CALMING PROJECT.
THE PETITION PROCESS FOR THE
GRANGER TRAFFIC CALMING PROJECT
BETWEEN STATE
AND PACKARD IS
COMPLETE AND IS NOW BEFORE US
FOR A RECOMMENDATION.
SO ASK RAYMOND IF YOU COULD
PLEASE REVIEW THE PROJECT AND
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS BEFORE WE
MAKE RECOMMENDATION.
THANK YOU.
PROJECT.
ALL RIGHT.
HOPEFULLY MY SCREEN IS NOW
SHOWING.
>> OK, SO THIS IS THE SECTION
OF GRANGER BETWEEN STATE AND
PACKARD AS BRET JUST MENTIONED
THIS PETITION WAS RECEIVED A
LITTLE WHILE AGO AND IT HAS
KIND OF BEEN THE FIRST ONE TO
GO THROUGH THIS LATEST ROUND.
THERE ARE FOUR DEVICES BEING
PROPOSED AS PART OF THIS.
SO THERE IS A RAISED
INTERSECTION AT GRANGER AND
WHITE.
THERE'S A RAISED CROSSWALK AT
PARC AND GRANGER THERE'S
ANOTHER RAISED CROSSWALK GOLDEN
AND GRANGER AND THEN THE FINAL
DEVICE THE FOURTH DEVICE IS A
SPEED TABLE JUST EAST OF THE
MIDWAY POINT BETWEEN GOLDEN AND
PACKARD ON GRANGER.
SO AS IS PAR FOR THE COURSE THE
WAY THIS PROCESS UNFOLDS, WE
HAD OUR CONSULTANT HELP US WITH
THIS PROCESS AND PROJECT.
WE HAD SOME EXPLORATORY IDEAS
THAT WERE ROLLED OUT IN THE
FIRST MEETING.
THEN WE MAKE REFINEMENTS TO
THAT BASED ON THE FEEDBACK WE
HEAR FROM THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND
THEN COME BACK WITH FINAL
DESIGN CONCEPT WHICH IS THE ONE
THAT YOU SEE BEFORE YOU.
WE KIND OF ROLL THAT OUT, GET A
FINAL READ FROM THE
NEIGHBORHOOD TO SEE IF ANY LAST
MINUTE ADJUSTMENTS ARE NEEDED
OR NOT AND THEN WE ULTIMATELY
SEND IT OUT TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FOR A VOTE.
WE DID HEAR BACK FROM RESIDENTS
OF THOSE THAT WE HEARD BACK
FROM SEVENTY FIVE PERCENT
SUPPORT IN THIS PROJECT AND SO
THAT'S ENOUGH TO ADVANCE IT
FORWARD.
SO FOR THE PROCESS WE BRING TO
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
FIRST BEFORE IT GOES TO CITY
COUNCIL WE ARE A TEAM THAT'S UP
FOR THE SECOND MEETING IN JUNE
FOR CITY COUNCIL DEPENDING ON
WELL YOU KNOW, REGARDLESS
OF WHAT THE RECOMMENDATIONS
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION IT
WILL FORWARD ALONG.
BUT YOUR RECOMMENDATION WILL BE
REFLECTED IN THE POSITIVE OR
THE NEGATIVE FOR THE PROJECT IN
THE RESOLUTION ITSELF I WILL
NOTE THE PROJECT COST IS A
LITTLE EXPENSIVE.
THIS TENDS TO HAPPEN ESPECIALLY
WHEN WE HAVE RAISED
INTERSECTIONS BECAUSE IT'S JUST
THERE'S A LOT OF WORK THAT
NEEDS TO BE DONE, ESPECIALLY IF
THERE ARE MANHOLES OR OTHER
KIND OF INFRASTRUCTURE THAT
NEEDS TO BE RAISED.
SO THIS IS JUST SHY OF THE TWO
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLAR MARK TO
IMPLEMENT THESE FOUR DEVICES.
SO JUST SOMETHING TO BE MINDFUL
OF ESPECIALLY GIVEN THE BUDGET
THAT WE HAVE AVAILABLE TO US.
BUT IT IS THE PROJECT THAT
SEEMS TO BE THE MOST SUPPORTED
BY THE THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> SO WITH THAT I DO HAVE THE
RESOLUTION UP BUT IT KIND
OF GOES INTO SOME OF THE
BACKGROUND DETAILS OF THE
PROCESS.
HERE'S THE SEVENTY FIVE PERCENT
OF SURVEYS REPORTED POSITIVE
RESPONSE AND THE COST IS
IDENTIFIED THERE AT ONE HUNDRED
NINETY EIGHT THOUSAND DOLLARS.
>> SO WITH THAT I'M HAPPY TO
ENTERTAIN ANY QUESTIONS YOU
MIGHT HAVE A QUESTION JUST
RAISE YOUR HAND EITHER EARLIER
.
>> JULIE, CAN YOU REMIND ME
WHAT A SPEED TABLE IS?
>> YEAH, IT'S IT'S LIKE A SPEED
SPEED TAPE ON SPEED.
HOMES ARE JUST VARYING WIDTHS
BUT THEY'RE THEY'RE VERY
SIMILAR SPEED TABLE SPEED HUMP
AND RAISED CROSSWALK OUR KIND
OF BIRDS OF A FEATHER THEY'RE
VERY SIMILAR IN NATURE.
>> SO IN THAT STRETCH THEY'RE
THREE RES ELEMENTS IN THE
STREET SO TWO TO RACE CROSS
CROSSWALKS AND THEN THIS SPEED
TABLE AT CORRECT.
>> AND THEN THERE'S THE RAISED
INTERSECTION AS WELL.
SO FOUR TO FOUR
.
>> RIGHT.
MOLLY RIMMINGTON, YOU REMIND US
WHAT THE TOTAL ANNUAL TRAFFIC
COMING BUDGET IS.
>> YEAH, SO WE HAVE TWO HUNDRED
AND SIXTY THOUSAND IN THIS
FISCAL YEAR.
SO THE WAY WE'RE STRUCTURING
THIS GRANT OR THIS PETITION
WHEN WE TAKE IT TO COUNCIL IS
ANY UNSPENT FUNDS FROM THIS
FISCAL YEAR.
WE'RE GOING TO ASK TO ROLL OVER
TO HELP PAY FOR SOME OF THIS
AND THEN DIP INTO NEXT YEAR AS
WELL.
BUT WE ARE STILL TRYING TO
MARCH AS MANY OF THE PETITIONS
FORWARD AS POSSIBLE AND THEN IF
WE DO HIT A POINT WHERE THERE'S
A SUPPLEMENTAL BUDGET ASK
THAT'S NEEDED DEPENDING ON HOW
EXPENSIVE THE OTHER PROJECTS
COME IN, WE CAN KIND OF CROSS
THAT BRIDGE WHEN WE GET TO IT.
WE'RE HOPEFUL THAT NOT ALL
OF THE PROJECTS WILL BE THIS
EXPENSIVE RAISED INTERSECTIONS
JUST REALLY ARE A PRETTY
EXPENSIVE DEVICE AND THIS ONE
INCLUDES ONE.
SO THAT'S WHY THIS ONE'S A
LITTLE BIT HEFTIER THAN WHAT WE
MIGHT EXPECT ON SOME OF THE
OTHERS JULIE AND I DO MEAN
DOMINATE THE DISCUSSION BUT
THIS IS KIND OF A FOLLOW UP.
SO IS THERE ANY DIMINISHING
RETURNS TO THAT MANY RAISED
ELEMENTS LIKE WITH 3V AND I'M
JUST THINKING ABOUT THE COST
AND HOW TO BE EQUITABLE TO
OTHER NEIGHBORHOODS AS WELL.
YEAH, WHAT WE TRY TO DO IS HAVE
A MINIMUM SPACING BETWEEN
DEVICES THAT KIND OF ENSURES
THERE EFFECTIVENESS.
I CAN'T RECALL EXACTLY WHAT
THAT MEASUREMENT IS.
I WANT TO SAY IT'S AROUND TWO
HUNDRED AND FIFTY FEET SO ALL
OF THESE DEVICES ARE SPACED AT
THAT DISTANCE OR GREATER YOU I
THINK IT'S WHAT WE TRY TO DO IS
COME UP WITH CONCEPTS BASED ON
SOME OF THE CONCERNS WE HEAR
FROM THE NEIGHBORHOOD, SOME
OF THE BEHAVIORS SO OFTENTIMES
IT'S SPEEDING OR CUT THROUGH
TRAFFIC THROUGH THE CORRIDOR
ITSELF.
BUT THEN LIKE THE RACE
CROSSWALKS ARE MEANT TO
OBVIOUSLY SLOW VEHICLES DOWN
BUT THEN ALSO IMPROVE THE
PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT AND
THAT'S OFTENTIMES WHAT WE DO
WITH THE RAISED INTERSECTION.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, KNOW THE
INTERSECTION AT WHITE INCLUDES
THE CROSSWALKS AS WELL IN ALL
DIRECTIONS TO THEM THAT WAY YOU
HAVE KIND OF THAT ADDED BENEFIT
FOR FOR THAT.
SO YEAH, IN TERMS OF YOU KNOW,
WHETHER IT'S TOO MANY OR TOO
LITTLE WE JUST TRY TO STRIKE
THAT BALANCE AND SOME OF THE
BACK AND FORTH CONVERSATIONS
THAT WE HAVE WITH THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> THANK YOU.
>> YOU STARTED TO TOUCH ON THIS
MAYBE IT'S OBVIOUS BUT WHAT'S
THE BENEFIT OF THE RAISED
CROSSWALKS WHERE THE SPEED
HUMPS AS A PEDESTRIAN
VISIBILITY OR YEAH, IT'S REALLY
ABOUT THAT RELATIONSHIP
OF WHERE THE CROSSWALK IS IN
RELATIONSHIP TO THE TRAFFIC
HOMING DEVICE.
SO WHEN WE DO A RACE CROSSWALK
WE KIND OF GET A TWO FER RIGHT.
WE'RE GETTING AN EXISTING
CROSSWALK BRINGS THE
PEDESTRIANS TO HIGHER
PROMINENCE, GETS CARS TO SLOW
DOWN AT THAT CROSSWALK AND I
BELIEVE AND I THINK IT'S ON THE
OTHER GRANGER PROJECT.
SO THE YEAH.
THE BENEFIT IN TERMS OF THEIR
EFFECT ONCOMING TRAFFIC,
THEY'RE VERY SIMILAR BECAUSE
THEY'RE DESIGNED FOR A SIMILAR
SORT OF DESIGN SPEED AND WHAT
HAVE YOU.
IT'S JUST REALLY A QUESTION
OF PLACEMENT AND IF A PLACEMENT
ALIGNS WITH THE CROSSWALK RACE
CROSSWALK AS OPPOSED TO
DISRESPECTABLE THANK YOU.
YEP.
YEAH THE CROSSWALKS AND THE
PROJECT ARE CROSSWALK ARE
CURRENTLY THERE RIGHT.
SO THIS IS JUST TAKING WHAT'S
THERE AND THEN RACING THEM
QUESTION ABOUT THE COST IT'S
BEING SPLIT OVER FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY THREE AND TWENTY FOR THE
OTHER APPROXIMATE SPLIT HOW
MUCH IS CAN BE ATTRIBUTED TO
TWENTY THREE AND HOW MUCH WILL
COME OUT OF TWENTY FOUR.
>> UNFORTUNATE I DON'T HAVE
THAT.
THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION FOR US
TO FOLLOW UP ON.
I WILL STILL HAVE SOME BILLS TO
PAY FOR TWENTY THREE AS WE ARE
CONTINUING TO PROCESS
ADDITIONAL PETITIONS WE'LL HEAR
SOME OF THOSE UPDATES WHEN WE
GIVE THE STAFF UPDATE LATER BUT
SO OBVIOUSLY THERE'S SOME WORK
THAT'S BEING DONE BY WAY TRAM
AND STAFF THAT WILL HAVE TO
ACCOMMODATE FOR BUT ANYTHING
LEFT OVER BEYOND THAT WOULD
ROLLOVER.
I DON'T HAVE A GOOD GUESS IN
TERMS OF WHAT THAT AMOUNT IS
RIGHT NOW BUT IT IS SOMETHING
WE'LL BE PREPARED FOR
ESPECIALLY AS WE BRING THIS TO
COUNCIL.
>> IS THIS THE STREET THAT ALSO
HAD THE ADVISORY BIKE LANE PUT
IN LIKE A COUPLE OF I JUST KIND
OF CURIOUS LIKE IS THAT I'M
CURIOUS LIKE WAS THERE FEEDBACK
ON HOW THAT HAS GONE SO FAR?
>> DID THAT RELATE TO THE
DISCUSSIONS ABOUT WHAT TO PUT
IN AS PART OF THIS PROJECT AT
ALL?
I THINK SOME YES, THE ADVISORY
BIKE LANES WHICH MEGHAN IS
REFERRING YOU MAY RECALL THIS
WAS A COUPLE TREATMENTS THAT WE
EXPERIMENTED IN A COUPLE
DIFFERENT PLACES.
THE DEA DID IT AS PART OF THE
WESTERN EDGE OF THE WILLIAM
STREET PROJECT.
WE DID ONE ON SUMMIT JUST NORTH
OF BEEKS AND THEN GRANGER AS
WELL.
AND THIS IS WHERE YOU HAVE KIND
OF THE DASHT BIKE LANES KIND
OF ON THE SIDE AND THEN OF THE
CENTER RUNNING VEHICULAR TRAVEL
LANE WHICH IS MEANT TO KIND
OF YIELD TO CYCLISTS OR GIVE
ROOM FOR CYCLISTS.
BUT THEN IF THERE'S ONCOMING
TRAFFIC THEN THEY SHARE THE
ROAD LIKE THEY WOULD IN ANY
OTHER CONDITION.
WHAT WE FOUND IS THERE WAS A
PRETTY POSITIVE RECEPTION AMONG
CYCLISTS WITH THAT FACILITY.
IT DID HAVE A SORT OF MARGINAL
TRAFFIC CALMING EFFECT FROM
WHAT WE CAN TELL.
BUT IN TERMS OF I THINK THERE
WAS STILL THIS DESIRE FOR SOME
ADDITIONAL TRAFFIC CALMING TO
AND GOOD NEWS TOO IS WELL I
KNOW SPEED HUMPS HAVE IMPACT ON
CYCLISTS AS WELL.
THE FACT THAT THESE ARE BIGGER
DEVICES AND NOT SPEED BUMPS WE
TEND NOT TO DO SPEED BUMPS.
WE DO THESE MORE ELONGATED
SPEED TABLES AND SPEED HUMPS
AND TO RAISE CROSSWALKS THEY
TEND TO BE LESS JARRING FOR
CYCLISTS THEN IT'S A LITTLE BIT
EASIER TO GET OVER SO SO I
DON'T HAVE A GOOD ANSWER ABOUT
HOW WELL THAT PLAYED INTO THE
NEIGHBORHOODS CONSIDERATION
OF THESE DEVICES BUT IT IS
SOMETHING THAT WE WERE TRYING
TO BE MINDFUL OF WHEN WE CAME
UP WITH THIS AND THAT'S BEEN MY
EXPERIENCE TO THE SPEED TABLES
OR NOT NOT AS BAD AS A CYCLIST
.
SO LIVING ONE BLOCK OFF OF THIS
SECTION I'M VERY HAPPY TO SEE
THIS HAPPY TO SEE THE PROPOSED
DESIGN COME THROUGH AND I'VE
HEARD A LOT OF SUPPORT
AMONG
NEIGHBORS.
LIKE YOU SAID, THE PEOPLE SEEM
TO LIKE THE ADVISORY BIKE LANES
BUT I DON'T THINK IT REALLY DID
ANYTHING FOR TRAFFIC AND YOU
KNOW, ONE NEIGHBOR TOLD ME A
COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO HE SAID
YOU CAN PUT THE SPEED LIMIT AT
ONE.
CARS WILL STILL COME BLOWING
THROUGH HERE AT THIRTY OR
FORTY.
SO I THINK HAVING THIS KIND
OF A DESIGN IS GOING TO REALLY
HELP JUST THIS MORNING ON THE
WAY BACK FROM SCHOOL DROP THERE
WERE TWO CARS THAT YOU KNOW,
YOU CAN HEAR THEM ROARING
GRANGER TO MAKE THE LIGHT TO
CROSS PACARD.
THEN OF COURSE AS SOON AS THEY
CROSS THEY SLOW DOWN ON THE
OTHER SIDE.
BUT SO YEAH, I'M VERY MUCH
LOOKING FORWARD TO THESE
TREATMENTS AND THE TREATMENTS
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF PACARD AND
GRANGER THAT WILL TAKE YOU TO
SEE IF THERE ARE NO OTHER
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS.
ACTUALLY MAYBE THIS IS A GOOD
TIME TO ASK THIS QUESTION
RAIMENT A BIGGER PICTURE
QUESTION WE'VE TALKED A LOT
ABOUT THE CONSULTANTS ARE
HELPING GREATLY CLEAR THE QUEUE
OF APPLICANTS OR PETITIONERS
BUT HOW DOES THAT PLAY INTO THE
ACTUAL PHYSICAL CONSTRUCTION
OF THE BUDGET IS STILL THE SAME
AND I THINK I SAW SOMEWHERE
THAT WE EXPECT TO CLEAR TEN
PETITIONS THIS YEAR.
IT DOESN'T IS THERE A BIG
DISCONNECT BETWEEN STARTING THE
PETITION PROCESS THE WORK
WITHIN CITY AND THEN BEING
ACTUALLY ABLE TO PHYSICALLY
CONSTRUCT THESE?
>> YEAH, IT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
WHAT WE DO IS WE PIGGYBACK ALL
OF OUR TRAFFIC CALMING
INSTALLATIONS AS PART OF OUR
RESURFACING PROGRAM.
SO IT'S ACTUALLY LINE ITEMS IN
THE BID PACKAGE HAVE FULL SCALE
RESURFACING AND ALL THE
DIFFERENT TREATMENTS.
BUT THEN THERE'S ALSO A SERIES
OF TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES THAT
THE CONTRACTORS HAVE TO BID ON.
SO RAISE CROSSWALKS, RAISE
SPEED TABLES, THINGS LIKE THAT
RAISED INTERSECTIONS.
SO THEN THAT WAY WE HAVE THAT
CAPABILITY TO WHEN WE FINALIZE
A PROJECT SUCH AS THIS WE CAN
JUST KIND OF TRACK IT ON TO
THAT.
AND SINCE THERE IS DEDICATED
FUNDING WE DON'T NEED TO FIND
ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR
IMPLEMENTATION OF THOSE
PROJECTS IN TERMS OF KIND
OF THE THE RELATIONSHIP OF HOW
COST EFFECTIVE IT IS TO USE THE
CONSULTANT FOR THIS WORK.
I THINK STILL IT'S TO BE
DETERMINED BUT BASED ON OUR
INITIAL KIND OF COST ESTIMATION
OF HOW MUCH STAFF TIME IT TAKES
VERSUS THE CONSULTANT TIME, IT
SEEMED TO BE PRETTY CLOSE AND
COST AND SINCE STAFF HAS PULLED
A LOT OF DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS,
THIS IS ALLOWING US TO PROCESS
MORE PETITIONS.
SO I DON'T WE DON'T ANTICIPATE
A LARGE INCREASE IN THE STAFF
COST OR THE PETITION COST AND
THE CONSTRUCTION COST IS JUST A
FUNCTION OF WHAT THE OUTCOME
OF THE PETITION PROCESS IS.
SO SO I THINK THIS IS THE THIS
WILL BE THE FIRST FULL FULLY
COMPLETE PROCESS.
WE'LL HAVE LIKE ONE FULL DATA
POINT TO KNOW IF STAFF WERE TO
DO IT VERSUS THE CONSULTANT IF
IT WAS LARGELY THE SAME THAT IS
MORE OF THOSE ARE FINISHED UP
AND WE'LL HAVE A BETTER AND
CLEARER PICTURE IF WE WANT TO
CONTINUE THIS FORWARD AGAIN,
OUR OUR WHOLE STRATEGY WITH
HIRING THE CONSULTANT WAS
BECAUSE THERE WAS THIS BIG
BACKLOG BECAUSE WE HAD UPWARDS
OF 17 OR 18 PETITIONS WE JUST
REALLY NEEDED THAT ADDED ACIDY
AND THE CONSULTANT WAS
AVAILABLE TO HELP US OUT AND SO
WE FELT IT WAS WELL WORTH IT TO
EXPLORE THAT OPTION UNTIL WE
GET CAUGHT UP.
>> SO WHEN YOU IF YOU CAN
PROCESS A PETITIONS IN A YEAR,
DOES THAT MEAN THEN IT'S
WHENEVER THE CONSTRUCTION
OPPORTUNITY OR THE WINDOW
BECOMES AVAILABLE THEN IT'S
JUST KIND OF READY TO GO OR
WHAT IS I GUESS IT'S STILL NOT
CLEAR TO ME WHAT GOOD DOES IT
DO TO CLEAR TEN PETITIONS IF
YOU CAN ONLY BUILD ONE PROJECT
A YEAR?
>> YEAH.
SO AGAIN THAT MIGHT REQUIRE A
FUTURE BUDGET ASK FOR BUDGET
MODIFICATION.
I KNOW THAT MIGHT BE A
DIFFICULT THING TO ASK FOR BUT
WHAT WE THOUGHT WAS WELL FIRST
OF ALL WE THERE WERE DURING THE
BUDGET PROCESS THERE WERE
ADJUSTMENTS MADE TO THE TRAFFIC
CALMING BUDGET.
SO I THINK GIVEN HOW MUCH ALL
THE COMPETING PRIORITIES WITHIN
THE CITY, THE INITIAL REQUEST
WAS FOR MORE THAN WHAT IT IS
RIGHT NOW KNOWING OR ANTICIPATE
WHAT YOU'RE BRINGING UP THAT
THERE WOULD BE IF WE CLEARED
OF THE BACKLOG OF PETITIONS
THEN THAT MEANS WE'RE GONNA
HAVE A BACKLOG OF CONSTRUCTION
AND CONSTRUCTION, THE HEAVY
LIFT OR AT LEAST THE EXPENSIVE
LIFT.
BUT AGAIN, THIS IS JUST TRYING
TO FIGURE OUT WAYS TO CLEAR
THIS QUEUE AND SO WE'RE
PROCESSING THE PETITIONS.
SO THEN THAT WAY WE CAN AT
LEAST TEAR UP THE CONSTRUCTION
AND WHETHER THAT MAKES IT INTO
THE TWENTY TWENTY FIVE BUDGET
AS A SPECIAL CHANGE OR A
SPECIAL BUDGET AMENDMENT OR
WHATEVER THE CASE MAY BE, I
THINK THAT'S TO BE DETERMINED.
WE'LL KNOW WHEN WE GET CLOSER
TO RUNNING OUT OF MONEY WHAT
HOW BIG OF A PROBLEM IT IS WE
HAVE TO SOLVE FOR BUT IT'S IT'S
A FAIR POINT JUST BECAUSE WE
GET CAUGHT UP ON PETITIONS
DOESN'T MEAN WE GET CAUGHT UP
IN CONSTRUCTION.
>> SO SORRY TO DEVIATE THERE.
>> ANY OTHER QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS ON THIS PARTICULAR
PROJECT OR IF NOT, IS THERE A
MOTION TO RECOMMEND APPROVAL
OF THE GRANGER TRAFFIC CALMING
PROJECT BETWEEN STATE AND
PACARD?
I MOVED BY DURHAM, SECONDED BY
MEGHAN ALL IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE
YOUR HAND AND ALL THOSE OPPOSED
PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE YOUR
HAND.
ALL RIGHT.
LOOKS LIKE THE MOTION PASSES SO
THAT WILL BE FORWARDED TO
COUNCIL LIKE RAYMOND MENTIONED
EARLIER RIGHT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
I ALSO SAY YES, I COULD GET ON
MUTE OFF QUICK ENOUGH.
>> HEY, THANKS.
I NEXT UP THE TRAFFIC COMING
SUBCOMMITTEE HAS BEEN MEETING
FOR SEVERAL MONTHS AND BROUGHT
FORWARD A DRAFT RESOLUTION FOR
OUR CONSIDERATION.
SO IF MOLLY AND COMPLETES THE
REVIEW THAT DRAFT RESOLUTION
AND ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS THAT
YOU'LL HAVE BEFORE WE MAKE
RECOMMENDATION, IT'S I CAN BE
MOLLY OR SOMEBODY GOING TO
SHARE I'M GOING TO KICK US OFF
WITH MY CAT DOESN'T TURN OFF MY
COMPUTER AT MOLLY IF YOU'D LIKE
ME TO BRING I HAVE THE
MATERIALS READY TO SHARE SO
TELL ME IF YOU WANT TO PULL ONE
EITHER THE RESOLUTION, THE BACK
UP OR WHATEVER ON SCREEN I'M
HAPPY TO DO THAT.
>> WELL, I THINK ONCE I THINK
ONCE WE'RE READY FOR THE
RESOLUTION IT'LL BE HELPFUL TO
HAVE IT ON SCREEN.
BUT JUST TO I'M GOING TO I'M
GOING TO BASICALLY TALK US
THROUGH THE BACKGROUND THAT WE
SHARED IN A SEPARATE DOCUMENT
TO HELP BRING EVERYONE ALONG
BECAUSE THIS HAS DEFINITELY
BEEN A JOURNEY.
SO AS YOU ALL MAY RECALL, THERE
WERE A FEW MOTIVES TO THE
CREATION OF THE TRAFFIC
COMMITTEE IN THE FIRST PLACE.
BIG ONE WAS HONESTLY WHAT WE
WERE JUST TALKING ABOUT.
SO IT'S A VERY POPULAR PROGRAM.
THE LAST SET OF REVISIONS MADE
IT EASIER TO QUALIFY AND WHAT
THAT MEANS IS THAN OTHERS.
BUT THERE'S BEEN THIS GROWING
BACKLOG OF PROJECTS THAT HAVE
BEEN DIFFICULT FOR STAFF TO
PROCESS.
IT'S THE PROCESS AS IT EXISTS
IS A LARGE ADMINISTRATIVE
BURDEN.
COST OF THE PROJECTS HAVE BEEN
GOING WHICH I FEEL LIKE TONIGHT
IS YET ANOTHER PRIME EXAMPLE.
SO IN ADDITION TO THE COST
OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE BURDENS
EACH PROJECT IS BECOMING MORE
COSTLY WHICH TAKES UP MORE
OF THE BUDGET.
IT'S GENERALLY NOT A SYSTEMATIC
PROGRAM SORT OF DRIVEN BY
NEIGHBORHOOD DEMAND.
BUT NEIGHBORHOODS ALSO HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO VETO AT THE END
WHICH I'M GOING TO TALK ABOUT
I'M GOING TO STAY IN ORDER.
ANOTHER PIECE OF IT IS THAT
IT'S SORT OF GENERALLY USES A
HANDFUL OF DEVICES AND OFTEN
UNTIL NOW THE THE USE OF THESE
DEVICES IS SORT OF LIMITED TO
THE TRAFFIC COMING PROGRAM.
THE THE THE THERE'S A GENERAL
IDEA THAT ANY SORT OF VERTICAL
ELEMENT SO THAT'S THINGS THAT
YOU GO OVER LIKE SPEED HUMPS,
SPEED TABLES RAISED CROSSWALKS
ARE NOT THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BE
INCORPORATED INTO DESIGNS
WITHOUT THE SORT OF EXTENSIVE
NEIGHBORHOOD BECOMING PROGRAM
THAT'S BEEN THE PRACTICE
HISTORICALLY.
BUT WE HAVE THIS TRANSPORTATION
PLAN NOW THAT HAS ALL OF THESE
DIFFERENT ELEMENTS IN IT THAT
SORT OF EXPAND THE MENU AND SO
ON.
ONE GOAL WAS TO TRY AND THINK
ABOUT HOW WE MIGHT EXPAND THE
USE OF THOSE THINGS AND THEN
ANOTHER PIECE OF IT IS THE WAY
THE PROGRAM IS MANAGED.
SO THE TRAFFIC CALMING PROGRAM
WAS ESTABLISHED BY A COUNCIL
RESOLUTION AND AS A RESULT
THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS ABOUT
IT THAT CAN'T CHANGE WITHOUT
ANOTHER COUNCIL RESOLUTION AND
IT MEANS THAT IT'S NOT VERY
FLEXIBLE AND STAFF DOESN'T HAVE
A LOT OF LATITUDE TO TO ADAPT
AS THINGS AS CONDITIONS HAVE
CHANGED OVER TIME.
IT'S ALSO WHAT'S CALLED AN
EMPOWERMENT PROGRAM.
SO THERE'S THIS SORT OF SCALE
OF ENGAGEMENT WITH THE PUBLIC
IS INFORM THE FIRST ONE OR IS
IGNORE THE FIRST ONE.
SO EVERYTHING FROM LIKE WE TELL
YOU WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN ALL
THE WAY UP THROUGH BASICALLY
YOU TELL US WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN WHICH IS THE EMPOWERMENT
THING AND THE THE TRAFFIC
CALMING PROGRAM IS THE THE ONLY
PROGRAM IS ALREADY IN THE CITY
THAT'S EMPOWERMENT LEVEL WHERE
WHERE RESIDENTS HAVE SO MUCH
INPUT OVER THE EVERY STEP
OF THE PROCESS INCLUDING
WHETHER OR NOT THE THING GETS
DONE ONCE IT'S BEEN THROUGH
THIS COSTLY ADMINISTRATIVE AND
DESIGN PROCESS.
>> SO THAT'S ALL THE
BACKGROUND.
DO PEOPLE HAVE QUESTIONS OR
CONTRIBUTIONS ABOUT ANY OF THAT
BEFORE WE DOVE INTO THE ACTUAL
PROPOSAL?
BECAUSE I DO FEEL LIKE IT TOOK
US MONTHS TO GET OUR ARMS ALL
THE WAY AROUND ALL THIS
CONTEXT.
AND SO I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
THE REST OF THE COMMISSION HAS
SOME SENSE OF OF WHAT WE'RE
DEALING WITH
EVEN LOOK GO FOR
YOU CAN ALWAYS ASK QUESTIONS
LATER.
SO THAT BRINGS US TO THE
RECOMMENDATIONS AND
I THINK
DARMA DID A REALLY GREAT JOB
HERE OF TRYING TO ROOT OUR
RECOMMENDED CHANGES IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN SO ALL
OF THE STUFF THAT WE'RE
RECOMMENDING IS GROUNDED IN
STUFF WE HAVE ALREADY SAID YES
TO AND THAT THE CITY HAS
ALREADY SAID YES TO IN BROAD
STROKES THE SPECIFICS THERE'S
SOME YOU KNOW, IT'S NOT ALL
IDENTICAL BUT THAT'S THE BASIC
THAT WAS THE GOAL.
AND SO I THINK NOW WE CAN LOOK
AT THE RESOLUTION AND YOU WERE
LIKE SO READY WE CAN SKIP ALL
THE WHEREASES.
I BASICALLY JUST EXPLAINED IT
ALL.
SO I THINK IT MIGHT MAKE SENSE
TO SORT OF WORK OUR WAY THROUGH
THOSE ALL WE'LL GO OVER ALL THE
RESULTS CAUSES AND THEN I WANT
TO MAKE SURE WE HAVE TIME TO
SORT OF TALK THROUGH THEM.
AND DARMA, ALSO IF YOU HAVE
ANYTHING TO ADD ABOUT ANY
OF THIS SO THE FIRST ONE IS
ADDRESSING THAT PROBLEM WHERE
IT'S A COUNCIL PROGRAM WITHOUT
MUCH FLEXIBILITY.
SO THIS IS THIS RESOLUTION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCIL
PASSED A RESOLUTION TO EMPOWER
THE ADMINISTRATOR TO MANAGE AND
MAINTAIN THE TRAFFIC CALMING
PROGRAM AND REMOVE THE
REQUIREMENT OF CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL FOR INDIVIDUAL COMING
PROJECT PLANS.
SO THIS THING WE JUST DID WHERE
WE SAW THE GRANGER DESIGN AND
WE RECOMMENDED APPROVAL AND IT
WENT IT'S GOING TO GO THE
COUNCIL AND THEN COUNCIL IS
GOING TO HAVE TO APPROVE OR
DENY THAT WOULD STOP ONCE THE
DESIGN WAS DONE AND THE
NEIGHBORS HAVE SAID YES, IT
WOULD BE READY TO GO INTO THE
QUEUE.
>> JUST WANT TO MAKE A NOTE
THAT STILL HAVE TO VOTE ON THE
CONTRACT TO APPROVE THE
SPENDING OF THE MONEY.
YEP.
SO THERE WILL STILL BE AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR COUNCIL
OVERSIGHT BUT WILL NOT BE
DUPLICATIVE.
OK, NEXT ONE RESOLVED THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCIL
MAINTAIN THE CURRENT LEVEL
OF FUNDING IN ORDER TO
ACCELERATE THE PROCESSING
NEIGHBORHOOD REQUESTS FOR
TRAFFIC COMING AND MEET THE
DEMANDS.
SO WE SAID MAINTAIN THE CURRENT
LEVEL BECAUSE THE CURRENT LEVEL
IS TWICE WHAT THE OLD LEVEL WAS
GIVEN WHAT WE WERE JUST TALKING
ABOUT WITH THE COST
OF INDIVIDUAL PROJECTS, MAYBE
THE CURRENT LEVEL IS STILL NOT
ENOUGH.
IT'S ENOUGH TO GET US THROUGH
THE BACKLOG BUT MAYBE IT'S NOT
ENOUGH TO ACTUALLY GET THE
STUFF BUILT.
BUT THE GOAL IS THAT AT THE
VERY LEAST WE SHOULDN'T REVERT
TO THE OLD FUNDING LEVEL WHICH
WAS HALF OF OUR CURRENT FUNDING
LEVEL.
NEXT ONE RESOLVE.
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCIL
DIRECT STAFF TO AMEND THE
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC PROGRAM TO
A COLLABORATIVE MODEL OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT INSTEAD OF THE
CURRENT EMPOWERMENT MODEL.
SO COLLABORATIVE IS LIKE ONE
STEP DOWN FROM EMPOWERMENT.
THERE'S STILL A LOT
OF ENGAGEMENT AND PARTICIPATION
BY THE PUBLIC.
THERE'S A LOT OF EMBRACING
OF THE EXPERTIZE THE PEOPLE WHO
LIVE AND WALK THE STREETS AND
DRIVE THE STREETS AND BIKE THE
STREETS EVERY DAY WILL HAVE
ABOUT WHAT IS NOT WORKING AND
WHAT COULD BE BETTER.
BUT IT TAKES AWAY THAT VETO
POWER AND HOPEFULLY IT WILL AT
LEAST SOMEWHAT ADDRESS THE
ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN OF THE
CURRENT PROCESS.
I THINK THERE WAS A SENSE AMONG
STAFF THAT YOU NEED A PRETTY
HIGH LEVEL OF PUBLIC
INVOLVEMENT IN ORDER TO MAKE
SURE THAT THERE'S NOT A
BACKLASH AFTER A PROJECT AND
THAT THE NUMBER ONE GOAL AS
RAYMOND TOLD US IN SEVERAL
MEETINGS WAS TO NOT INSTALL
STUFF THAT WE LATER HAD TO RIP
OUT.
AND SO SO THAT'S WHERE THIS
COMES FROM.
IT'S STILL STILL A PRETTY HIGH
LEVEL OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
BUT IT'S IT'S GOING TO ADDRESS
THIS A LITTLE BIT RESOLVE THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS A CITY COUNCIL
DIRECT STAFF TO INSTALL BUMP
OUTS BY DEFAULT ON STREETS WITH
STREET PARKING MEMBERS SHOULD
BE CONSIDERED AND CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLANNING
STREETSCAPE PROJECTS.
SO THIS GOES BEYOND
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC COMING
RECOMMENDATION.
SO ONE OF THE ONGOING THREADS
THROUGH OUR COMMITTEE MEETINGS
WAS THIS DESIRE TO SEE MORE
SPEED MANAGEMENT HAPPENING BY
DEFAULT ANY TIME WE'RE
RESURFACE IN A ROAD AND WE WENT
THROUGH A LOT ABOUT WHAT THAT
MIGHT LOOK LIKE AND WHAT THAT
MIGHT MEAN AND BUMP OUTS WAS
SORT OF THE THING THAT WAS
PRETTY STRAIGHTFORWARD.
IT'S IN THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN
STEP.
THIS WAS A RECOMMENDATION FROM
STAFF THAT COULD ADDRESS
PEDESTRIAN VISIBILITY AND ALSO
POTENTIALLY DO SOME SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND THAT WE SHOULD
JUST BE DOING THESE EVERYWHERE.
SO NOT JUST THE NEIGHBORHOOD
TRAFFIC COMING BUT EVERYWHERE.
>> NEXT ONE WE JUST THAT YEAH.
WELL DO YOU WANT TO WAIT TILL
THE END FOR ANY QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS ON THESE OR DO I GO AS
WAR RESOLUTIONS THAT I
REMEMBERED SO WHY DON'T WE
PAUSE AND ADDRESS THE FIRST
HALF AND THEN WE CAN KEEP
GOING?
>> OK, SO GO AHEAD.
>> YEAH ON THE ONE WE JUST WENT
THROUGH THE BUMP OUTS AND I
WANTED TO MENTION THE STAFF
RECOMMENDATION THAT'S ON THE
THE OTHER ATTACHED MEMO HERE
WITH A SUGGESTED FROM STAFF.
>> YOU KNOW I DO WANT ME TO TO
READ THAT OR REMENDER ABOUT HOW
DO WE WANT TO ADDRESS THAT
RAYMOND IT'S KIND OF AS WHY
DON'T WE SAVE THIS FOR THAT?
THAT'S ALL RIGHT.
SORT THORNIER PIECES BUT
SPOILER NOT EVERYTHING WE
RECOMMENDED IS FULLY SUPPORTED
BY STAFF AND WE'RE GOING TO
WE'RE GOING TO HASH THAT OUT
TONIGHT.
SO NEXT THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS THAT THE
APS TRANSPORTATION SAFETY
COMMITTEE SHOULD BE ENGAGED IN
THE DEVELOPMENT.
I WERE CHANGING THAT LANGUAGE
WELL ANYWAY IT'S THERE FOR NOW
OF A SCHOOL TRAFFIC COMING TO
GET THE IDEA IN QUESTION.
IS THAT AN ACTIVE COMMITTEE IT
JUST RESTARTED AFTER THREE
YEARS OF NOT MEETING?
I YEAH, I THOUGHT WE WERE GOING
TAKE THAT ONE OUT OF THE STAFF
MEMO TO SAY IT'S REWARDED JUST
RESOLVE THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS THE
DEVELOPMENT OF A SCHOOL TRAFFIC
CALMING TOOL.
YES, THAT'S THE WAY IT IS.
THAT'S THE WAY I LOOK AT THAT.
SO WE RECOMMEND THAT WE DEVELOP
A SCHOOL TRAFFIC COMING TO A
KID THAT WILL ENGAGE PROBABLY
MANY STAKEHOLDERS INCLUDING
PROBABLY ABOUT THE IDEA THERE
IS THAT THERE'S SORT
OF RECOGNITION AND DESIRE TO
POTENTIALLY LIKE BEEF UP WHAT A
DEFAULT IMPROVEMENTS WOULD LOOK
LIKE ON STREETS THAT ARE NEAR
SCHOOLS AND THAT ARE PARTS
OF ROUTES TO SCHOOLS AND THAT
THIS WOULD BE ANOTHER WAY TO
INCREASE WALKING AND BIKING TO
SCHOOLS AND CREATE MORE SAFE
ROUTES TO SCHOOL WITHOUT
NECESSARILY GOING THROUGH THE
SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL PROJECT.
BUT IT WOULD BE JUST AGAIN PART
OF THE DEFAULT AND THAT YOU
KNOW, WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT
DOING BUMP OUTS EVERYWHERE
MAYBE OR MAYBE IF YOU'RE WITHIN
A CERTAIN DISTANCE OF SCHOOL
IT'S LIKE OTHER STUFF TOO
WHATEVER THAT TOOLKIT MIGHT
LOOK LIKE DRAWING AGAIN ON WHAT
ELEMENTS THAT ARE ALREADY IN
THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
ALL RIGHT.
SO THE NEXT ONE THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THAT CITY COUNCIL
DIRECT STAFF TO ROUTINELY
EVALUATE OPPORTUNITIES TO
INCORPORATE TRAFFIC CALMING
ELEMENTS INTO ALL CAPITAL
PROJECTS WHICH MAY DISTURB THE
EXISTING ROAD SERVICE,
PARTICULARLY THOSE THAT ARE
PART OF THE ALL AGES ALL
ABILITIES NETWORK DEFINED THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN IN A SCHOOL
WALK ZONE WHERE A RECORD
OF CRASHES, SPEEDING AND OR
RESIDENT COMPLAINTS EXIST OR
THIS IS STILL THE EDIT VERSION
POSSIBLY CUT THROUGH STREETS AS
WELL REGARDLESS OF PETITION
STATUS.
SO THIS COMES BACK TO THAT
DESIRE TO INCORPORATE TRAFFIC
COMING IN SPEED MANAGEMENT INTO
ALL OF OUR ROAD RESURFACING
PROJECTS BY DEFAULT AND IT
WON'T BE NECESSARY.
THERE WILL BE RESURFACING
PROJECTS THAT DON'T NEED ANY
ADDITIONAL COMING.
THEY'VE ALREADY ALREADY BEEN
CALMED OR THEY ARE VERY LOW
TRAFFIC OR NARROW WHATEVER IT
IS.
SO IT'S NOT A REQUIREMENT THAT
THERE ALWAYS BE TRAFFIC AND
CALLED MANGOMA TRAFFIC ELEMENTS
INCLUDED IN RESURFACING
PROJECTS.
BUT THIS WAS OUR ATTEMPT TO
MOVE US TOWARDS COMING AS MUCH
AS WE CAN AS A PART OF REGULAR
RESURFACING.
SO AGAIN OUTSIDE OF THE
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC COMING
JUST THIS IS WHAT WE DO WHEN WE
TOUCH A STREET AND THEN FINALLY
WE'LL KEEP WORKING STAFF ON THE
STUFF AS A COMMITTEE.
SO THAT'S THOSE ARE ALL THE
THINGS THERE'S THERE'S A LOT IN
HERE.
SOME OF IT IS FOCUSED ON THE
EXISTING SORT OF REVISING THE
EXISTING COMMON PROGRAM.
SOME OF IT IS ABOUT LOOKING
BEYOND BUT YEAH, WE'RE HAPPY.
LET'S TAKE QUESTIONS AND THEN
WE CAN TALK ABOUT THE PLACES
WHERE THIS IS THE RESOLUTION
WE'VE WRITTEN DIFFERS FROM
STAFF RECOMMENDATIONS.
THIS IS THE PRODUCT A FANTASTIC
AMOUNT OF WORK AND DEDICATION
BY THE SUBCOMMITTEE.
>> SO I'M REALLY THRILLED TO
GET INTO THIS.
PETER SO THE SHORT-HANDED I'VE
HEARD FOR THE CURRENT STATE IS
THAT THE ONLY WAY TO GET ANY
VERTICAL ELEMENTS IN YOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD IS TO GO THROUGH
THE PETITION PROCESS?
I MEAN IS THAT A GOOD
DESCRIPTION?
I THINK I HEARD NICK SAY THAT
THE OTHER DAY WHEN WE WERE
TALKING ABOUT SEVENTH.
YEAH, THAT'S THAT'S FAIR.
I THINK WE WE JUST KNOW THAT
THEY CAN TEND TO BE FAIRLY
CONTROVERSIAL AND SO UNLESS WE
HAVE A FAIRLY YOU KNOW, WE
DIRECT PEOPLE TO THE TRAFFIC
CALMING PROGRAM IF THEY WANT
VERTICAL DEVICES.
>> OK, SO IS THE INTENT
OF THESE RESOLUTIONS TO KEEP IT
THAT WAY BECAUSE I DON'T SEE
WHERE IN THE RESOLUTIONS IT'S
AS EXPLICITLY THAT IF STAFF
THINKS THAT THE RIGHT THING TO
DO ON A CONTRACT ON THIS AREA
THAT WE'RE WORKING ON IS A
VERTICAL DEVICE THAT THEY CAN
JUST GO AND DO IT, I DON'T SEE
ANYTHING.
I THINK THAT WAS IN THAT
REQUIREMENT THAT WAS ACTUALLY
OUR INTENT WITH THE CLAUSE THAT
SAYS WE RECOMMEND CITY COUNCIL
DIRECT STAFF TO ROUTINELY
EVALUATE OPPORTUNITIES TO
INCORPORATE TRAFFIC ELEMENTS
SO
WHERE I CAN FILTER ANY TYPE
OF COMMUNITY TO OUR INTENT.
WELL, I GUESS I THINK OUR
INTENT WAS TO GIVE STAFF THE
WHOLE TOOLBOX THAT THEY CAN USE
IN ANY SITUATION.
>> SO I'M ON BOARD WITH THAT
INTENT AND I THINK WE NEED TO
BE A LITTLE MORE EXPLICIT ABOUT
SAYING THAT WE ARE ACTIVELY
GIVING THEM HORIZONTAL AND
VERTICAL DEVICES THAT THEY CAN
THAT THEY CAN IMPLEMENT AS
APPROPRIATE.
THAT JUST ISN'T THAT IS NOT
COMING THROUGH TO ME.
IT'S THAT THAT WE ARE UNDOING
THAT VERTICAL DEVICES ONLY BY
NEIGHBORHOOD REQUEST THAT THAT
DOESN'T SEEM CLEAR TO ME HERE.
NICK, I WONDER IF EITHER YOU
HAVE THOUGHTS ABOUT ABOUT THAT
.
>> YEAH, I MEAN I APPRECIATE
THE YOU KNOW, THE THE INTEREST
IN THIS FROM AND I KNOW THIS IS
SOMETHING WE TALKED ABOUT QUITE
A BIT AND EVEN MOLLY KIND
OF TOUCHED ON IT WITH ONE
OF HER STATEMENTS AND IT'S
SOMETHING THAT I DID DRIVE HOME
THIS POINT THAT THE BIGGEST
CONCERN WE HAVE IS WITHOUT
GOING THROUGH SOME PROCESS TO
IDENTIFY IF THERE'S SUPPORT FOR
VERTICAL DEVICES WE DON'T WANT
TO BE IN A SITUATION WHERE WE
HAVE TO UNDO CERTAIN THINGS.
NOW THAT'S NOT TO SAY THAT YOU
READ ON THIS RESOLUTION COULD
STILL ENABLE US TO DO THAT.
BUT I THINK THE THE IDEA IS WE
DON'T FIND IT A VERY PRODUCTIVE
USE OF RESOURCES BOTH MONITARY
CAPITAL STAFF IF WE END UP
PUTTING IN THINGS JUST TO TAKE
THEM.
AND SO WHAT'S NICE ABOUT THE
EXISTING PROGRAM IS BECAUSE IT
IS A NEIGHBOR INITIATED AND
IT'S A VERY SORT
OF COLLABORATIVE PROCESS TO
DEVELOP THE DEVICES.
WHEN WE LOOK AT GRANGER, FOR
EXAMPLE, THAT YOU ALL JUST
RECOMMENDED WE WENT THROUGH A
LOT OF ITERATIONS TO GET TO
THAT POINT.
WE WON'T BE ABLE TO DO THAT ON
EVERY SINGLE RESURFACING
PROJECT.
AND SO I THINK THE QUESTION FOR
US THAT WE WOULD HAVE TO TEASE
OUT IS IF THERE IS A LOCATION
WHERE WE THINK FOR VERTICAL
DEVICES MAKES SENSE BECAUSE
MAYBE THERE IS A DOCUMENTED
SPEEDING PROBLEM.
WE KNOW THERE'S SOME OTHER
ISSUE THAT WE'RE TRYING TO
SOLVE FOR I THINK IT WOULD UP
TO US TO FIGURE OUT HOW WE
COULD GET THE APPROPRIATE LABI
IN FROM THAT NEIGHBORHOOD TO
INSTALL THAT DEVICE AS PART
OF A PROJECT TO ENSURE THAT
IT'S SUPPORTED PRETTY BROADLY
AND THAT WE DON'T GET PEOPLE
YOU KNOW, HAVING US TAKE IT OUT
WITH THIS PARTICULAR RESULT
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT.
QUICK FOLLOW UP, IS IT A
PREREQUISITE THAT A CAPITAL
PROJECT HAPPEN OR BE PLANNED
BEFORE THESE ELEMENTS WOULD BE
YOU CAN INCORPORATE UNLESS THEY
ONLY BE INCORPORATED INTO A
CAPITAL PROJECT OR CAN THEY
OCCUR OUTSIDE OF A PLANNED
CAPITAL PROJECT?
>> I THINK WE WERE TRYING TO
DESCRIBE TWO THINGS.
SO ONE, THERE'S A PETITION
PROCESS THAT EXISTS THAT WOULD
CONTINUE TO EXIST.
I THINK THE OTHER PART OF THIS
WAS AND I THINK BY SAYING
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS WE
WERE TRYING TO DISTINGUISH KIND
OF LEVELS OF ROAD TREATMENT
BECAUSE WE DO PRETTY SIMPLE
SURFACE TREATMENTS, THE NAMES
OF WHICH I CAN'T REMEMBER WHICH
PROBABLY DON'T WARRANT THIS
LEVEL OF ENGAGEMENT AND ADDING
DEVICES.
AND SO I THINK THAT WAS REALLY
THE INTENT OF THAT TO TALK
ABOUT A SPECTRUM KIND OF ROAD
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS AND WHERE
IT WOULD BE APPROPRIATE TO
EVALUATE THIS WITHOUT A
PETITION.
>> OK, SO IT'S NOT POSSIBLE
SORRY THE OTHER HUNDREDS I
THINK SOMEONE ANSWERED IT SO
I'M GOOD THANKS.
OK, OTHER QUESTIONS ALL RIGHT.
GOING BACK UP TO I THINK THE
FIRST RESULT WAS REMOVE THE
REQUIREMENT OF CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL SO WITH THE CURRENT
PLAN THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION APPROVAL IS NOT
REQUIRED BUT GENERALLY WE WE
GIVE A RECOMMENDATION ONE WAY
OR ANOTHER TO COUNCIL.
DO YOU ANTICIPATE THAT STILL
HAPPENING?
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT CAN
STILL HAPPEN OR SHOULD YOU
SHOULD ANY OF THESE COME TO US
FIRST WE TALKED ABOUT THIS THAT
IT WOULD MEAN THAT WE DIDN'T
SEE THESE PROJECTS AND I THINK
THEY STILL COULD BUT IT WOULD
BECOME AN AND IT WOULD BE LIKE
AN INFORMATION PIECE OF THE
MEETING AS OPPOSED TO A
BUSINESS PIECE OF THE MEETING.
SO THERE WOULD NO LONGER BE
SOMETHING FOR US TO VOTE ON BUT
YEAH, I MEAN IT WAS SOMETHING I
WAS A LITTLE CONCERNED ABOUT
JUST BECAUSE THERE ARE LIKE WE
ALREADY PRETTY MUCH DON'T SEE
DENHA INITIATED DESIGNS UNTIL
UNTIL LIKE FAIT ACCOMPLI
BASICALLY.
AND SO TO REMOVE ANOTHER BATCH
OF THINGS FROM WHAT WE WOULD
HAVE A CHANCE TO SEE AND GET
FEEDBACK ON BUT I THINK WE
ALWAYS APPROVE THEM.
I DON'T THINK THERE'S EVER BEEN
A TRAFFIC COMING PROPOSAL THAT
HAS NOT RECEIVED SUPPORT FROM
THE COMMISSION.
AND SO THAT'S ALSO A SIGN TO ME
THAT WE PROBABLY DON'T THIS
ISN'T NECESSARY AS AN OVERSIGHT
STEP.
IT REALLY JUST WOULD ABOUT
INFORMING AND POTENTIALLY
GIVING FEEDBACK.
>> SO YEAH.
YEAH, AS LONG AS IT STILL FALLS
IN THE CATEGORY INFORMATIONAL
LIKE SO MANY OF THE OTHER LARGE
PROJECTS THAT COME TO US LIKE
WHETHER IT'S THE SOUTH STATE
STREET OR ERHART ROAD, YOU KNOW
WE GET A GREAT PRESENTATION, WE
GET INFORMED AND WE HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR INPUT IN THAT.
>> I THINK THAT'S VERY
APPROPRIATE.
IT'S A WAY TO REMOVE SOME
OF THAT BURDEN.
YOU KNOW, IF IT DOESN'T HAVE TO
COUNCIL OR TO COME TO US THAT
REMOVES THE BURDEN.
IT LOOKS LIKE LARRY WANTED TO
ASK A QUESTION OR MAKE A
COMMENT OR MAYBE MAYBE JUST
JUST DON'T KNOW ABOUT NO, I
DIDN'T WANT TO MAKE ONE YET SO
I WANTED TO MAKE SURE WE HAD A
CHANCE.
OK, NO OTHER HANDS IS RIGHT NOW
SO DOING IT AGAINST THE
BALLPARK'S SO I THINK WE READ
THE RESULT CLAUSE NOW.
YEAH I RAN OVER TO THE STAFF
COMMENTS.
>> THE STAFF RESPONSE IS MY
SCREEN SHARING APPROPRIATELY IS
AT THE OK OK YEAH SO I THINK
THE WHEN WE TALKED ABOUT THIS
INTERNALLY WITH SENIOR
MANAGEMENT AND STAFF THERE WAS
A LITTLE BIT HEARTBURN OVER THE
PRESCRIPTIVE NATURE OF THIS
RESULT COSTS WHEREBY WE COULD
EASILY IMAGINE A SITUATION
WHERE A BUMP OUT WOULD EITHER
BE COST PROHIBITIVE OR VERY
MARGINALLY BENEFICIAL OR YOU
JUST HAVE SOME AMOUNT
OF TECHNICAL CHALLENGES WHERE
WE THINK A LITTLE BIT
OF LATITUDE IN THE SPACE WOULD
BE APPROPRIATE.
THE OTHER THING TO NOTE HERE
IS, YOU KNOW, BUMP OUTS ALSO
COST SOME FUNDING.
SO IF AS PART OF EVERY SINGLE
PROJECT WE'RE PUTTING IN OR
BUMP OUT ON A TYPICAL FOUR
LEGGED INTERSECTION, YOU KNOW
YOU'RE GOING TO LOOK AT COSTS
ESCALATING FOR A PROJECT,
ESPECIALLY IF IT'S BLOCKS WIDE.
>> IT MAY INCREASE THE COST BY
TENS OF UPWARDS OF A COUPLE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS.
SO JUST ALLOWING SOME LATITUDE
I THINK TO STAFF TO TO
DETERMINE THE APPROPRIATENESS
OF WHETHER BUMP OUTS ARE DONE
AS A MATTER OF COURSE I THINK
IS WHAT WE'RE ASKING FOR IS A
LITTLE BIT OF FLEXIBILITY HERE
.
SO THE SUGGESTED EDIT IS TO TO
STRIKE A COUPLE OF WORDS AND
ADD SOME LANGUAGE.
SO RIGHT NOW SAYS YOU KNOW,
RESOLVE THE TRANSPORTATION
QUESTION REMAINS A CITY COUNCIL
DIRECT STAFF STYLE BUMP OUTS BY
DEFAULT ON STREETS WITH
ON-STREET PARKING SHOULD BE
CONSIDERED IN CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLANNING
STREETSCAPE PROJECTS CHANGING
THAT TO SAY TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSIONER RECOMMENDS THAT
CITY COUNCIL DIRECT STAFF TO
INSTALL BUMP OUTS ON STREETS
WITH ON STREET PARKING IF
DEEMED ADVISABLE BY STAFF.
I CAN SEE IT CONSIDERING
FEASIBILITY COSTS, BENEFITS AND
OTHER RELEVANT FACTORS.
SO AGAIN IT'S JUST TRYING TO TO
ALLOW A LITTLE BIT
OF FLEXIBILITY AND DISCRETION
ON THIS.
WE ARE TRYING TO DO A LOT
OF THIS WORK ALREADY.
I WON'T CLAIM THAT IT'S
SYSTEMATIC YET BUT THERE ARE
THERE HAVE BEEN RECENT PROJECTS
WHERE WE HAVE PUT IN PLACE AS
PART OF THE PROJECT BUT THERE
MIGHT BE SITUATION WHERE YOU
KNOW, IT'S NOT ADVISABLE SO SO
THERE IS THERE'S NO TRIGGER
EVENT MENTIONED HERE LIKE YOU
KNOW, IF THIS PAST I MEAN YOU
WOULDN'T WOULD YOU INTERPRET
THIS AS WE NEED TO GO DO
BIPARTITE EVERYWHERE
IMMEDIATELY OR IS THIS AGAIN
WHEN THERE'S A CAPITAL PROJECT
AND THE IDEA WAS WHEN THERE'S A
CAPITAL SO LIKE WHEN YEAH.
THIS IS PART OF THE WHOLE LIKE
WHEN WE'RE TOUCHING A STREET WE
SHOULD BE INSTALLING ABOUT THAT
BUT THAT'S OK AND THAT MIGHT BE
SOMETHING THAT WE CAN CLARIFY
IN THAT IN THAT LANGUAGE
BECAUSE A SECOND SENTENCE IS
JUST CONSIDER THEM BUT THAT'S
THAT'S FOR STREETSCAPE
PROJECTS.
SO THAT'S KIND OF A SEPARATE
THING, IS THAT RIGHT?
I THINK SO.
BUT I'M GOING TO HAND OUT MY
ANSWER THAT
OK?
I DON'T THINK SO.
I GUESS I DON'T KNOW WHERE
STREETSCAPE CAME IN.
I THINK IT'S JUST CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS THREE PROJECTS
BECAUSE RIGHT THERE JUST AS D
CONSIDERED SO THAT KIND OF A
ALIGNS WITH THE SUGGESTED EDIT
.
SO IF IT SEEMS LIKE THERE'S A
DISCREPANCY BETWEEN THOSE TWO
SENTENCES AND AS C STANDS AM I
I THINK IT'S BY DEFAULT ON
STREETS WITH ON STREET PARKING
CONSIDERED ON EVERY MAJOR
THINGY WHETHER OR NOT ON STREET
PARKING I THINK THAT'S THE
SECOND WHAT THE SECOND SENTENCE
IS GETTING AT THAT WRONG?
YEAH I THINK OK.
I THINK BASICALLY WHEN I WROTE
THIS I THOUGHT MY ORIGINAL
PIECE GAVE THAT FLEXIBILITY BUT
I THINK THERE ARE STILL
SOMETHING ABOUT IT THAT YOU
KNOW, I UNDERSTAND IT'S
PROBABLY STILL COMING ACROSS AS
REALLY PRESCRIPTIVE.
SO MY READ ON THIS IS THAT
MAYBE THERE'S SOME DUPLICATION
IN THE REVISED VERSION BUT I
THINK IT TRIES TO GET THE SAME
THING WHICH IS ALLOWING STAFF
DISCRETION BASED ON THOSE
THINGS.
CONSIDER IT BUT BALANCE THIS
BALANCE THESE THINGS AND I
THINK THAT WE STRUGGLED WITH
THE FACT THAT I THINK THAT
WE'RE TRYING TO LIKE IN THE WAY
OUR WHOLE PROJECT HERE HAS BEEN
A REACTION TO THE OVERLY KIND
OF PRESCRIPTIVE OVERSIGHT
NATURE OF THE CURRENT TRAFFIC
CALMING AND THEN LIKE I THINK
THAT WE REALIZED IN SOME WAYS
ARE SPEAKING FOR MYSELF.
I THINK THAT SOMETIMES WE WERE
TRYING TO SIMILARLY BE VERY
PRESCRIPTIVE.
SO I I THINK THAT MAYBE THERE'S
SOME WORD SOMETHING THAT COULD
HAPPEN.
BUT I THINK THE FUNDAMENTAL
THING WAS GIVING STAFF SOME
DISCRETION.
PETER.
SO OUR OUR TRANSPORTATION PLAN
SAYS BUMP OUTS SHOULD BE
CONSIDERED IN CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS PLANNING
STREETSCAPE PROJECTS.
THAT'S ONE BULLET POINT AND
THEN IMPLEMENT A POLICY TO
INSTALL BUMP OUTS BY DEFAULT ON
STREETS WITH ON STREET PARKING
.
SO THAT IS IN THE PLAN THAT
WE'VE ALREADY AGREED TO.
SO I GUESS CONSIDERING THAT I
AM OK WITH THE LANGUAGE AS IT
IS, I WOULD LIKE TO KEEP IT THE
WAY IT IS AND IF WE IF WE WANT
TO PUT IN SOME SOME WAY TO DEAL
WITH A PARTICULAR HARD ROCK, WE
HAVE A PLACE WHERE I BUMP OUT
JUST ABSOLUTELY WILL NOT WORK
OR WILL BE TOO EXPENSIVE THEN
LET'S COME UP WITH A PLAN FOR
DEVIATING FROM OUR DEFAULT
POLICY WHICH IS INSTALLED
BOMBLETS EVERYWHERE.
SO I GUESS I WOULD RATHER I'D
RATHER COME UP WITH A WAY FOR
LIKE WHAT DO WE DO IN THE IN
THE SITUATION WHERE WE
DEFINITELY CAN'T HAVE ONE FOR
SOME SPECIAL REASON AND AND
LEAVE THIS LANGUAGE AS IT IS SO
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT WOULD
LOOK LIKE BUT FOR EXAMPLE, IT
MIGHT BE THAT IN THAT CASE WE
HAVE TO ASK COUNCIL TO DEVIATE
SO OUR OUR STANDARD AS WE PUT
THEM EVERYWHERE WE'RE NOT GOING
TO PUT THEM SOMEPLACE THEN WE
HAVE TO ASK COUNCIL WHERE IT
COULD BE THAT WE WE HAVE TO
THAT WE HAVE TO EXPLAIN WHY
WE'RE NOT DOING THERE I DON'T
KNOW BUT THAT THE THE DEFAULT
SHOULD BE WHAT WE HAVE IN OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN WHICH IS
INSTALL
LOLLIE OR DARMODY ONE
TO DO YOU HAVE A GERMAN GUIDE
RESPONSE?
OH SURE.
MOLLY AND I MIGHT RESPOND
DIFFERENTLY OBVIOUSLY I'M
LOOKING AT THIS FROM A COUNCIL
PERSPECTIVE BUT I WOULD LOVE
INPUT FROM THIS COMMISSION JUST
TO LIKE THINK ABOUT HOW BALANCE
THERE MIGHT BE TRADE OFFS AND
OUR OWN ADOPTED TRANSPORTATION
PLAN.
SO AS I THOUGHT THROUGH THIS
THOUGHT ABOUT WHAT IT WOULD
MEAN TO KIND OF DO THIS BY
DEFAULT ON EVERY STREET.
SO TO SPEAK, I YOU KNOW,
SITTING FROM THE ROOM THAT I
WORK AND LOOKED OUT MY WINDOW
AND I LIVE IN THE CORNER OF TWO
VERY LOW TRAFFIC STREETS.
I'M NOT BY A SCHOOL.
THERE'S NO SPEEDING ISSUES THAT
I'VE EVER REALLY HEARD ABOUT
AND I THOUGHT DO DO YOU REALLY
AS TRANSPORTATION ADVOCATES
WOULD IT BE THE OUTCOME DESIRED
TO INSTALL SOMETHING THAT
PERHAPS DOESN'T DO ANYTHING TO
PROMOTE SAFETY OF THE STREETS
OR TO PROMOTE PEOPLE DECIDING
TO WALK OVER OR NOT WALKING
VERSUS SOME OF OUR OTHER
AMBITIOUS GOALS THAT WE HAVE
LIKE TRAFFICABLE ON MAJOR
STREETS?
AND I STARTED THINKING I THINK
IT'D BE KIND OF OVERKILL ON MY
STREET MANY STREETS IT WOULD
NOT BE OVERKILL BUT YOU KNOW, I
THINK THERE ARE A LOT
OF STREETS LIKE MINE WHERE IT
PROBABLY WOULD BE TOO MUCH WHEN
I SAY TOO MUCH IT'S IN RELATION
TO THOSE TWO GOALS ZERO TRAFFIC
DEATHS AND PROMOTING PEOPLE TO
USE ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION AS A
CHOICE THAT'S COMFORTABLE AND
VIABLE.
MY TWO SONS WANT TO THANKS TO
ME I AIR ON THE SIDE
OF CONTEXTUAL EXPERTIZE BY
STAFF SO I'M MORE ON THE LINE.
I AGREE WITH DARMA AND RESPECT
THAT WE HAVE TO KIND OF RESPECT
THE CONTEXT AND I TOTALLY HEAR
YA ON OUR TRANSPORTATION PLAN
BUT THEN CREATING THAT DEFAULT
AND SAYING THAT HEY, A LOT
OF OUR FUNDING IS GOING TO BE
DESIGNATED TO THERE UNLESS
PROVEN OTHERWISE I ALMOST AGAIN
I ARE ON THE SIDE OF PROVIDING
STAFF WITH THAT LEVEL
OF DISCRETION AND AGAIN
CONTEXTUAL EXPERTIZE SO THAT
THAT'S JUST MY TWO CENTS BETTER
IMPLEMENTING A POLICY THAT SAYS
THAT WE THAT WE HAVE SOME
THRESHOLD FOR TRIPS PER DAY OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT IS NOT I
THINK INCONSISTENT WITH WHAT'S
IN THE IN THE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN BUT I DON'T LIKE I DON'T
LIKE THE PROPOSED LANGUAGE THAT
SAYS I DON'T LIKE THE PROPOSED
LANGUAGE TO ME THAT SOUNDS LIKE
WE'LL KNOW WE NEED ONE WHEN WE
SEE IT.
I WOULD LIKE SOME REAL SOME
SOME REAL SPECIFICATION AROUND
WHEN WE GET THEM AND LIKE I
SAID, WHETHER THAT'S TRIPS PER
DAY OR SOME OTHER MEASURE THAT
CAN BE PART OF THE POLICY, I
THINK THAT IT'S NOW TIME TO ASK
FOR FOR WHAT THAT IS.
IT MAY IT MAY BE THAT STAFF
NEEDS TO GO BACK AND FIGURE OUT
WHAT THE CUTOFF IS.
BUT LET'S AGREE ON THE CUTOFF
BEFORE WE YOU KNOW, BEFORE WE
DECIDE ON ON THE POLICY.
I DO NOT THINK THAT THE
PROPOSED LANGUAGE IS
PRESCRIPTIVE ENOUGH.
THAT'S MY SO I THAT'S ALSO I
HAVE CONSISTENTLY COME DOWN I
HAVE AN IDEA THAT I WISH I HAD
HAD BEFORE TEN MINUTES AGO
WHICH IS TO REVISE THE LANGUAGE
SO THAT LET'S SEE I I NEED TO
PULL IT UP AGAIN REAL QUICK SO
THAT IT WOULD SAY BY DEFAULT IT
ACTUALLY MIGHT BE FASTER IF YOU
IF YOU PULL IT UP IF YOU HAVE
ALREADY BUT BASICALLY INSTEAD
OF THE PROPOSED REVISION
LET'S
SEE TO THERE IT IS OK DIRECT
STAFF TO INSTALL DUMP OUTS BY
DEFAULT ON STREETS WITH
ON-STREET PARKING UNLESS SO
THAT INSTEAD OF THERE BEING
TOTAL STAFF DISCRETION WE SET A
FLOOR AND EVERYTHING GETS BUMP
OUTS ABOVE OUR FLOOR AND I
AGREE IT'S PROBABLY MY TAKE A
LITTLE BIT OF DOING TO FIGURE
OUT WHAT THE FLOOR SHOULD BE
AND WE CAN INCLUDE SOMETHING
ABOUT LIKE UNLESS THE COST
WOULD DRAMATICALLY EXCEED THE
TYPICAL COST OF BUMP OUTS OR
THERE'S SOME OTHER
TOPOGRAPHICAL FEASIBILITY OR I
THINK I WE DON'T ROUTINELY HAVE
VOLUMES ON A STREET LEVEL.
RIGHT.
SO I'M WONDERING IF THERE'S
SOME OTHER EXISTING
CLASSIFICATION BECAUSE I DO I
UNDERSTAND STAFF'S CONCERN
ABOUT ADDING A PROCESS FOR
EVERY RESURFACING PROJECT IF WE
HAVE TO THEN BE COLLECTING
VOLUMES ARE DOING SOME OTHER
LEVEL OF DATA COLLECTION THAT
WE WOULD NOT OTHERWISE HAVE
DONE.
BUT SO BUT THAT WOULD BE THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THIS WOULD BE
BY DEFAULT UNLESS AS OPPOSED TO
IF HOW DOES THAT FEEL TO YOU?
I'M YEAH I I THINK IT COULD
WORK I MEAN DEPENDING ON WHAT
WE CHOOSE AND WHAT LEVEL WE SET
IT UP.
>> YEAH.
WHAT CRITERIA WE USE AND THEN
WHERE WE SET THE IT.
>> YEAH RIGHT.
I MEAN THAT'S WHAT IT WILL COME
DOWN TO.
THAT WILL BE WHERE THE
WRANGLING IS I YOU KNOW I KNOW
I UNDERSTAND THAT ONE OF THE
CONCERNS WAS AROUND BUMP OUTS
INCREASING THE COST OF EVERY
PROJECT AND I THINK THAT THAT'S
OK.
I THINK THAT DEMANDING THAT WE
THAT WE WHEN WE MAKE A STREET
BETTER WE MAKE IT BETTER FOR
EVERYONE AND THAT IS OUR
DEFAULT.
I THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
SO I'M NOT SO CONCERNED ABOUT
INCREASING
COSTS PERIOD.
BUT I RECOGNIZE THAT THERE MAY
BE
EXCESSIVE COSTS IN SOME
INSTANCES OR OTHER OTHER
BARRIERS OR IN THIS CASE OTHER
REASONS WHY IT'S JUST NOT
NEEDED.
BUT I WANT TO HAVE SOME REAL
CLARITY ABOUT WHAT THAT LOOKS
LIKE.
I DON'T I DO NOT WANT TO LEAVE
IT UP FULLY TO STAFF DISCRETION
BECAUSE IT WILL JUST BE TOO
EASY TO SAY EVERY TIME.
MAY I ALSO ADD WE'RE SORT
OF TALKING ABOUT TWO REASONS
TWO DIFFERENT REASONS WHY WE
WOULDN'T WANT A BUMP OUT.
DAMAR BROUGHT UP THE IDEA THAT
SOME STREETS DON'T NEED THEM
LIKE STREET.
SO THAT IS WHY WE NEED A FLOOR.
RIGHT.
BUT THERE ARE THERE COULD BE
ANOTHER THERE COULD BE OTHER
UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES THAT
MIGHT, LIKE YOU SAID, FALL INTO
THE CASE OF IT'S TOO EXPENSIVE
FOR THE TOPOLOGY DOESN'T
SUPPORT IT OR FOR SOME REASON
LIKE THAT.
I THINK IT'S OK TO HAVE AN OFF
RAMP TO THIS FOR THOSE THAT WE
CAN TAKE UNDER THOSE
CIRCUMSTANCES, SOME OF WHICH WE
HAVEN'T EVEN THOUGHT OF YET BUT
FOR ME ASKING FOR APPROVAL TO
USE THE OFF RAMP INSTEAD
OF ASKING FOR APPROVAL TO PUT
IN BUMP OUTS IS THE WAY THAT WE
SHOULD BE DOING IT.
THAT'S WHAT IT MEANS TO ME TO
BE BY DEFAULT.
SO IF WE IF WE HAVE TO BUILD IN
THIS OFF RAMP IT GETS USED VERY
RARELY FOR REALLY UNUSUAL
CIRCUMSTANCE THEN LET'S DO IT.
I'M OK.
I'M OK WITH THAT TOO TO HELP
COVER SOME OF THOSE UNUSUAL
CIRCUMSTANCES THAT MIGHT BE
WORRIED ABOUT
.
YEAH SO I I PERSONALLY I AGREE
YOU KNOW, I DO THINK ABOUT
CERTAIN AREAS LIKE IF THEY ARE
NO HILLS AREA WHERE YOU KNOW
MAYBE YOU HAVE A CUL DE SAC
WITH ONE OR TWO HOUSES ON AND
YOU KNOW SOMEWHERE THAT WE WANT
TO SPEND MONEY TO PUT A BUMP
OUT FOR THE INTERSEXUAL BUT SO
PROCESS IS DHUEY AT THE RISK
OF WORD SMITHING THIS DURING A
MEETING DO WE WANT TO DO TWO
INSTEAD OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE
COME UP WITH WORDING ON THIS?
>> WE'LL BRING IT BACK.
IS IT THE RIGHT WAY TO GO ABOUT
THIS?
YOU THINK?
I THINK I'LL GO AHEAD, MOLLY.
YOU GO I THINK I THINK I THINK
SO.
I THINK I WOULD WANT I WOULD
WANT SOME MORE CLARITY FROM
STAFF ON SOME PIECES.
I THINK IT'S WORTH TAKING OUR
TIME GIVEN THAT WE'VE ALREADY
TAKEN SO MUCH TIME TO GET TO
GET THAT THIS PIECE RIGHT AS A
YEAH, I HAD ANOTHER IDEA WHICH
IS THAT YOU KNOW, I THINK
ANOTHER POTENTIAL WAY TO HANDLE
IT I'M NOT SURE IF YOU THINK
THIS IS REASONABLE WOULD BE TO
FOR THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSIONS RESOLUTION TO READ
THAT THEY WANT TO BUY DEFAULT
WITH A SPECIFIED FOR LIKE YOU
COULD ESSENTIALLY BE KIND
OF RECOMMENDED TO COUNCIL THAT
THEY CREATE THIS AND THEN THAT
COULD BE OUR WORK.
>> NOW IT'S BETTER TO DO IT
THIS WAY.
ALL RIGHT.
NO AND IF WE CAN MAKE IT WITHIN
A MONTH OR SO I THINK I'M A
HUGE YOU KNOW, AS LONG AS THE
SUBCOMMITTEE IS WILLING TO TO
MEET AGAIN, I'VE STILL GOT THE
HOLDS ON MY CALENDAR.
I'M NOT TAKING THEM AWAY
ACTUALLY BUT I'M NICK JUST AS
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT TIMING
THERE I ONE THING I WOULD SAY
IS THAT I FEEL LIKE THERE IS
DEFINITELY SOME TIME HERE
BECAUSE PRETTY MUCH ALL OF OUR
WORK FOR THIS YEAR HAS BEEN
BEAT OUT ALREADY.
SO REALLY THIS ISN'T GOING TO
REALLY AFFECT MUCH UNTIL NEXT
CONSTRUCTION SEASON ANYWAY.
SO FROM THAT PERSPECTIVE I SAID
THERE'S NOT A BIG HURRY HERE
BECAUSE EVEN IF THIS WAS
APPROVED NOW AND WENT TO
COUNCIL NEXT MONTH IT'S NOT
GOING TO REALLY AFFECT ANYTHING
IMMEDIATELY ANYWAY.
>> SO OK, SO I THINK THAT'S
OTHER ANY OTHER RESOLVE CLAUSES
OR WHEREAS CLAUSES THAT WE
THINK DESERVE TO BE TO BE
LOOKED AT AGAIN
.
PETER JUST THE THE PART ABOUT
MAKING IT CLEAR THAT STAFF CAN
CONSIDER VERTICAL ELEMENTS
WITHOUT A PETITION I THINK WE
COULD WE COULD ADD LIKE TWO
WORDS IN THE RESULT CLAUSE TO
MAKE IT CLEAR THAT THEY THAT
THEY HAVE THAT ABILITY NOW I'M
GOOD WITH THAT AND THERE'S ALSO
THE THE AROUND SCHOOL IS
THERE'S ARE REWARDED VERSION
RIGHT IN THE STAFF AT THAT I
SAID THAT THAT'S THE PREFERRED
VERSION RATHER THAN WHAT'S OK
OK SO ANY OTHER COMMENTS ON
THIS BEFORE WE SEND IT BACK TO
THE COMMITTEE?
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO RAYMOND, I GUESS WE'RE NOT
GOING TO TAKE A MOTION HERE TO
APPROVE OR ANYTHING ELSE,
RIGHT?
>> RIGHT.
I THINK I MEAN IF YOU WANT TO
BE REALLY PARLIAMENTARIAN ABOUT
IT, I GUESS YOU COULD MAKE A
MOTION TO POSTPONE BUT WE TEND
NOT TO BE AS RIGID SO WHATEVER
WHATEVER YOUR PREFERENCES ALONG
WITH POSTPONING IT, DON'T YOU
HAVE TO HAVE A SPECIFIC DATE
AND WHEN IT COMES BACK OR IS
THAT THEY'LL POSTPONE VERSUS
TABLING TABLING I THINK
SUSPENDED INDEFINITELY UNTIL
YOU BRING IT OFF THE TABLE BUT
POSTPONE TYPICALLY MEANS TO THE
NEXT MEETING BUT YOU CAN SET A
MEETING I THINK I THINK WE ALL
KNOW WHERE WITH WHAT NEEDS TO
HAPPEN OR SO WE'RE JUST.
ALL RIGHT.
EXCELLENT.
THANK YOU AGAIN.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THIS IS A LONG OVERDUE PROJECT
THAT NEEDED TO BE UNDERTAKEN
AND IT WAS A BIG UNDERTAKING.
SO THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> ALL RIGHT.
LET'S SEE THAT WAS THAT OK?
ALL RIGHT.
INFORMATION AND DISCUSSIONS
SECTION NEXT IS THE GET DOWN
TOWN UPDATE THE GET DOWN TIME
PROGRAM PROVIDES COMMUTING
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES TO
DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR EMPLOYEES
AND EMPLOYERS.
LILLIAN WEBB IS WITH US THIS
EVENING TO GIVE A BRIEF
OVERVIEW OF THE DOWNTOWN
PROGRAM AND ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS WE MIGHT HAVE SO GO
DO YOU NEED TO SHARE YOUR
SCREEN?
YES,
LILLIAN.
>> YOU SHOULD HAVE CO-HOST
CAPABILITIES.
I THINK YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO
DO SO.
OK, MILES, JUST GET ON THAT AND
ALL RIGHT.
AND GOOD.
IT'S COMING.
>> THANK YOU.
I'M REALLY GLAD TO HAVE A
CHANCE TO CONNECT WITH THIS
COMMISSION AND SHARE AN UPDATE
ABOUT THE GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM.
>> I'M LILLIAN WEBB.
I AM THE DOWNTOWN DIRECTOR
RIGHT NOW AND JUST WANT TO TAKE
A FEW MINUTES OF YOUR TIME TO
KIND OF TALK THROUGH THE GET
DOWNTOWN PROGRAM.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE WE'RE
ALL FAMILIAR WITH IT BEFORE
TALKING ABOUT ITS THREE MAIN
PROGRAMS AND WHERE THOSE STAND
KIND OF AS THE LAST THREE YEARS
HAVE BEEN A LOT OF TRANSITION
AND JUST FINISH WITH KIND
OF WHERE WHERE WE'RE AT AND THE
PLAN MOVING AHEAD AND
APPRECIATE OPPORTUNITIES THAT
THE WORK OF THIS COMMISSION AND
THE STAFF WITH THE CITY VAN
ARBOR TRANSPORTATION GROUP
REALLY HELPED MAKE IT POSSIBLE
TO DO MANY OF THE THINGS WE'RE
WORKING ON A LITTLE BIT
OF BACKGROUND THE GET DOWNTOWN
PROGRAM WAS FOUNDED TO PROVIDE
AN ALTERNATIVE FOR PARKING THE
RENOVATION OF THE PARKING
GARAGES THAT WE'RE REACHING
CAPACITY AND ALSO NEEDING
RENOVATION IN NINETEEN NINETY
NINE AND SO MULTIPLE
ORGANIZATIONS CAME TOGETHER TO
FORM THIS PROGRAM AND MAKE IT
POSSIBLE IT CONTINUES ON TO
THIS DAY IS CONTINUING TO HELP
DOWNTOWN EMPLOYEES COMMUTE AND
USE NOT JUST THE BUS SERVICE
BUT ALSO TO WALK, BIKE,
CARPOOL, TAKE ANY SORT
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
MODES THAT REDUCE DRIVE ALONE
TRIPS AND RELIEVE THAT CAPACITY
AND CONGESTION ISSUE.
AND THEN THE LAST KIND OF PIECE
ABOUT BACKGROUND I THINK IT'S
IMPORTANT TO KNOW BEFORE WE
KIND OF GO AHEAD IS THAT IT IS
STILL FOCUSED ON THE DOWNTOWN
AREA SO AS WE'LL KIND OF GET
INTO THE PROGRAM PARTNERS ARE
THE RIDE.
I'M AN EMPLOYEE OF THE RIDE A
LOT OF WORK HOUSED AT THE
TRANSIT CENTER A LOT OF WHAT I
DO IS MARKETING AS WELL.
BUT THE ANN ARBOR IS ANOTHER
FOUNDING PARTNER.
THEY ARE A LARGE PART AND ABLE
THE GO PASS PROGRAM WHICH I
THINK A LOT PEOPLE DO RECOGNIZE
AND GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM OR AT
LEAST RECOGNIZED THAT NAME
OF THE GO PAST PROGRAM AS WELL
AS CONTRIBUTE TO HELPING MAKE
PEOPLE AWARE OF THE OPTION TO
NOT DRIVE WHEN THEY WANT TO GO
TO WORK IN DOWNTOWN.
AND THEN OF COURSE THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR IS ALSO A PARTNER
IN THE GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM
WITH A LOT OF SUPPORT
PARTICULARLY FOR THE TWO ANNUAL
CHALLENGES CONQUER THE COLD IN
THE WINTER AND THE COMPUTER
CHALLENGE WHICH WE'RE IN THE
MIDDLE OF RIGHT NOW IN MAY
IN
THE LAST KIND OF GROUP THAT
ENABLED US TO GET DOWNTOWN
PROGRAM TO REALLY REACH MAXIMUM
NUMBERS ARE THE EMPLOYERS AND
OTHER CHAMPIONS WHO HELPED GET
THE WORD OUT TO FOLKS WHO ARE
WORKING DOWNTOWN ABOUT GET
DOWNTOWN PROGRAM, WHETHER IT'S
HOSTING THE RESOURCES IN THEIR
INTERNAL BLACK CHANNELS OR IN
THEIR ROOMS AND MAKING SURE
THAT EMPLOYEES WHO ARE ON BOARD
AND KNOW ABOUT BIKE PARKING AND
THAT THEY CAN SIGN UP FOR THE
GO PASS PROGRAM AND SO ON.
SO ALL ALL OF THESE ARE
NECESSARY BUT OF COURSE IF YOU
GUYS WE WANT TO MAKE SURE WE'RE
TALKING A LITTLE ABOUT THE ANN
ARBOR ROLE WITH THE GET
DOWNTOWN PROGRAM
.
SO AS MENTIONED, SOME OF THE
BENEFITS ARE PARTICIPATION IN
THE CHALLENGES THERE IS FREE
COMMUTE CONSULTING.
NOT A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE TAKING
US UP ON THAT NECESSARILY RIGHT
NOW.
THERE'S A LOT OF GREAT
INFORMATION ON THE GET DOWNTOWN
PROGRAM WEBSITE ABOUT COMMUTING
WITHOUT A CAR.
BUT YOU COULD ALSO FOLKS WHO
ARE IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA CAN
REACH OUT AND WE WILL PROVIDE
THE PERSONAL SUPPORT THE
WEBSITE AS I MENTIONED IS
AVAILABLE WHETHER YOU'RE
DOWNTOWN OR NOT, YOU CAN EASILY
ACCESS THAT INFORMATION AND THE
GO PASS PROGRAM IS ANOTHER
BENEFIT THAT SPECIFIC TO THE
DOWNTOWN AREA BECAUSE THE DENHA
IS THE FUNDING THAT THROUGH A
GRANT TO THE RIDE.
SO WITH THAT SORT OF BACKGROUND
I CAN MOVE INTO A LITTLE BIT
OF WHERE WE WERE BEFORE AND
WHERE WE ARE NOW WITH THE GO
PASS PROGRAM GO PASSES THEY ARE
PASSED THAT ALLOW FOLKS TO USE
THE BUS FOR TWELVE MONTHS AT
TYPICAL TWELVE MONTH PERIOD IS
NOVEMBER 1ST THROUGH HALLOWEEN
OF THE NEXT YEAR THAT AN
EMPLOYER WILL MAKE A REQUEST TO
PURCHASE GO PASSES FOR THEIR
TEAM MEMBERS WHO ARE INTERESTED
IN USING THE BUS AND THEN THEY
WILL HAND THOSE PASSES OUT TO
THEIR EMPLOYEES FOR USE TO GET
TO WORK AND HOME FROM WORK AND
ONCE THEY LEAVE THEIR EMPLOYER
EMPLOYERS WILL USUALLY LET US
KNOW EITHER THEY'LL GET THE
PAST BACK AND HOLD ON TO IT
UNTIL THEY HAVE ANOTHER
EMPLOYEE OR THEY'LL LET US KNOW
THAT THAT PERSON IS NO LONGER
WITH THEM AND NOT A PART OF THE
PROGRAM ANYMORE WHAT THEY GET
WHEN THEY RECEIVE THE GO PAST
THIS IS A PICTURE OF THE
CURRENT ONE IS UNLIMITED RIDES
ON THE RIDES FIXED ROUTE
SERVICE AND THEY'RE ALSO GOING
TO BE ABLE TO RIDE ON THE FLEX
RIDE EAST AND WEST IN THE AREAS
OUTSIDE OF THE FIXED ROUTE
SERVICE.
THEY'RE ALSO ABLE TO GET
DISCOUNTS ON THE HOLIDAY AND
LATE NIGHT SERVICES THAT FILL
THE GAPS WHEN THE RIDES FIXED
ROUTES AREN'T RUNNING, THEY'RE
ELIGIBLE FOR EMERGENCY RIDE
HOME REIMBURSEMENT.
SHOULD FOLKS BE NERVOUS ABOUT
TAKING THE BUS IN CASE THEY
NEED TO PICK UP KIDS FROM
SCHOOL?
THERE IS THIS EMERGENCY RIDE
HOME PROGRAM THAT SAYS HEY,
DON'T EVEN WORRY ABOUT IT WILL
REIMBURSE YOU IF YOU NEED TO
CALL A LIFT OR NO LOCAL
BUSINESSES BEING KIND OF A PART
OF THE DOWNTOWN COMMUNITY OFFER
FOLKS IF YOU SHOW YOUR GO PASS
YOU CAN MAYBE GET TEN PERCENT
OFF OF A COFFEE AND SO THEY
OFFER THAT AND ONCE AGAIN THE
KIND OF QUALIFICATION FOR THAT
IS THE WORKPLACE MUST BE WITHIN
THE BOUNDARY.
THERE'S SOME ADDITIONAL
REQUIREMENTS AS FAR AS HOW
OFTEN FOLKS WORK IN THERE AND
HOW OLD THEY ARE IN ORDER TO BE
ELIGIBLE FOR THIS PASS.
SO THIS IS JUST A GRAPH THAT
SHOWS KIND OF FROM THE TWENTY
NINETEEN TO TWENTY TWENTY YEAR
THE YEAR THE GO PASS PERIOD
THAT STARTED IN NOVEMBER TWENTY
NINETEEN.
HOW MANY EMPLOYERS WERE OPTING
IN DOWNTOWN EMPLOYERS OVER FOUR
HUNDRED AND WE'VE REACHED KIND
OF A NEW NORMAL BUT IT'S STILL
GROWING OF ABOUT TWO HUNDRED
PLUS EMPLOYERS WHO ARE STILL
OPTING INTO THE PROGRAM AND
EVEN THOUGH WE ARE MORE THAN
HALFWAY THROUGH THE YEAR WE
STILL DO SEE NEW PEOPLE
LEARNING ABOUT THE GO PASS
PROGRAM MOVING INTO DOWNTOWN
WHERE THEY WEREN'T BEFORE AND
WANTING TO PARTICIPATE AND
WANTING TO TAKE THE BUS AND BE
A PART OF THIS PROGRAM SO THAT
THEY TOO CAN USE AN ALTERNATIVE
FORM OF TRANSPORTATION
THAT
WILL KIND OF TRANSITION TO THE
CONKER THE COLD CHALLENGE.
SO THIS IS OCCURS IN THE WINTER
PERIOD AND IT'S ENCOURAGING
COMMUTERS TO MOVE TO USE
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION
MODES DURING THE WINTER MONTHS
EVEN WHEN IT'S COLD.
SO TWENTY TWENTY TWO WITH A
TRANSITION PERIOD FOR THE
DOWNTOWN PROGRAM.
SO THE LAST TIME THAT CONKER
THE COLD HAPPENED WAS IN
JANUARY TWENTY TWENTY ONE PRIOR
TO THE MOST RECENT ONE AS YOU
CAN UNDERSTAND IT WAS A UNIQUE
TIME.
IT WAS STILL A LOT OF UNKNOWN
IN TERMS OF THE PANDEMIC.
THERE WERE FORTY EIGHT PEOPLE
WHO DID LOG TRIPS USING OUR
TRIP LOGGING WEBSITE OR APP
REPRESENTING TWENTY TEAMS AND A
BIG FOCUS OF THAT ONE WAS
SUPPORTING LOCAL BUSINESSES
WHETHER YOU WERE ORDERING
TAKEOUT OR USING ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION TO GET YOUR
CARRY OUT SINCE FOLKS MAY NOT
HAVE BEEN GOING TO WORK AS
OFTEN.
WE'RE EXCITED THOUGH TO HAVE
BROUGHT IT BACK FOR TWENTY
TWENTY THREE THIS YEAR IS
CONQUER A COLD RAN FROM JANUARY
TO FEBRUARY 10TH AND TWO
HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN
PARTICIPANTS RECORDED THEIR
TRIPS A LITTLE MORE THAN THAT
ACTUALLY ENDED UP SIGNING UP OR
BEING INVITED TO THE THE
WEBSITE BUT TWO HUNDRED AND
FOURTEEN LONG TRIPS AND THEY
LOGGED OVER 6000 TRIPS
ACCORDING TO KIND OF THE ROUGH
CALCULATIONS THAT OUR SYSTEM
USES.
THEY SAY 13 TIMES MORE FUEL AND
GREENHOUSE GASES AND THEY
BURNED OR PRODUCED THERE ARE A
LOT OF WALKING AND BIKING TRIPS
BUT THERE WERE A LOT OF MILES
SAVED FROM FOLKS WHO TELEWORK
OR CARPOOLS AND THOSE FOLKS
TENDED TO COME FROM FURTHER
DISTANCES
.
THE LAST PROGRAM I'LL MENTION
HERE IS THE COMMUTER CHALLENGE
WHICH IS HOPEFULLY MORE
APPEALING SINCE IT'S NICER
WEATHER THAN JANUARY TO HAVE
MAY AND SPRINGTIME BE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO INVITE FOLKS TO
WALK CARPOOL VAN, TAKE THE BUS
SCOOTER OR WHATEVER NEW FORMS
OF TRANSPORTATION THAT AREN'T
DRIVING ALONE TO DO SO WITH
THEIR WORKPLACE AND GET STARTED
IN MAY AND CONTINUE TO DO IT
EVEN WHEN THE COMPETITION IS
OVER.
>> SO THE PREVIOUS COMMUTER
CHALLENGE WAS IN SEPTEMBER
TWENTY TWENTY ONE FORTY EIGHT
PEOPLE HAD LONG TRIP
REPRESENTING THIRTY THREE TEAMS
AGAIN STILL A TRANSITION
PERIOD.
THE RIDE HAD COME BACK TO FULL
SERVICE AT THAT POINT BUT AS WE
CAN I THINK UNDERSTAND THERE IS
STILL NOT A LEVEL OF NORMALNESS
NECESSARILY TO THAT TIME.
>> HOWEVER THIS YEAR WE ARE
MIDWAY THROUGH THE CHALLENGE
AND ALREADY ONE HUNDRED AND
EIGHTY PEOPLE HAVE LOGGED THEIR
TRIPS.
THERE ARE 50 TEAMS AND GROWING.
A LOT OF THEM ARE WORKPLACE
TEAMS WHERE PEOPLE ARE
COMPETING AND INVITING THEIR
COLLEAGUES TO JOIN THEM IN
MAKING SUSTAINABLE TRIPS OR
MAKING TRIPS THAT AREN'T DRIVE
ALONE AND WHAT WE'RE HOPING TO
SEE AS A PROGRAM GOAL IS NOT
JUST THE FOLKS WHO NORMALLY
BIKE ARE SAME FOLKS WHO WE LOVE
FROM THE CONQUER THE COLD
CHALLENGE.
WE'RE WILLING TO DO IT IN
JANUARY.
THEY'RE NOT THE ONLY ONES WHO
ARE TALKING ABOUT THIS AND
GETTING EXCITED AND REWARDED
FOR IT BUT THAT THEY'RE
INVITING THEIR COLLEAGUES WHO
MAY BE MORE NERVOUS ABOUT IT OR
HAVEN'T THOUGHT ABOUT IT BEFORE
TO GET TALKING ABOUT WE GET TO
WORK AND THE ALTERNATIVE WAYS
WE CAN DO IT.
SO LOOKING AHEAD KIND OF COMING
OUT OF THAT TRANSITION PERIOD,
JUST WANT TO BRIEFLY TOUCH ON
KIND OF SOME THINGS THAT WE'RE
WORKING ON AND WHERE THOSE
OPPORTUNITIES TO TIE IN WITH
THIS GROUP SO ALL OF TWENTY
TWENTY TWO WE'VE CONTINUED TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO RESTART THOSE
STAPLE PROGRAMS AND MAKE SURE
THEY'RE STRONG AND GROWING AND
THAT MORE PEOPLE KNOW ABOUT
THEM MYSELF.
I STARTED IN THIS ROLE SPRING
OF LAST YEAR SO I WAS GETTING
TO KNOW FOLKS GETTING TO KNOW
WHO WHO COULD HELP ME AND HOW
WE COULD COMMUNICATE ABOUT WHAT
WAS GOING ON AND WHAT WE FOUND
IS THAT A LOT OF PEOPLE ON THE
OTHER SIDE AT OUR EMPLOYERS
HAVE ALSO CHANGED MAYBE SWITCH
JOBS OR DIFFERENT ROLES.
AND SO IT'S A TWO WAY STREET IN
TERMS OF PEOPLE GETTING A
BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF HOW TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE CHALLENGE
AND ARE THEY ALLOWED TO DO THIS
OR WHO IS THE RIGHT CONTACT.
SO IT'S BEEN AN ONGOING PROCESS
OF REBUILDING POINTS OF CONTACT
AND GENERAL AWARENESS AND
UNDERSTAND OF WHAT GET DOWNTOWN
DOES AND CAN DO FOR OUR
DOWNTOWN EMPLOYERS AND
COMMUNITY CONTINUING.
HAD WE JUST FINISHED COMMUTER
SURVEY SO IT WAS TWO SURVEYS
THAT
WERE END OF APRIL,
BEGINNING OF MAY THE FIRST ONE
WAS DIRECTED AT EMPLOYERS
TRYING TO GET A BETTER SENSE
OF THEIR UNDERSTANDING OF THE
EMPLOYEES NEEDS AND WORK
SCHEDULES AND HOW WE CAN HELP
THEM.
AND THEN THE SECOND PART WAS TO
COMMUTER'S THEMSELVES TELLING
US DIRECTLY HOW THEY COMMUTE
THEIR SCHEDULES AND WAYS THEY
COULD USE SUPPORT OR INCREASED
AWARENESS.
SO THE RESULTS OF THAT ARE
STILL FORTHCOMING BUT WE'RE
EXCITED TO LOOK INTO NEW WAYS
TO HELP FOLKS IN THE NEW NORMAL
THAT MAYBE IS DIFFERENT FROM
THE LAST TIME THAT SURVEY WAS
DONE WHICH GET DOWNTOWN HAS
DONE EVERY COUPLE OF YEARS BUT
THE LAST ONE WAS IN TWENTY
EIGHTEEN.
>> THE OTHER EXCITING PART IS
TO HARNESS THE COMMUNITY IN
THIS AREA OF SEEMINGLY
ENTHUSIASM FOR THINGS THAT
SUPPORT ALTERNATIVE
TRANSPORTATION.
SO BOTH THE COMMUNITY CLIMATE
ACTION MILLAGE THAT HAS FUNDS
AVAILABLE FOR WALKING AND
BIKING INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE
MILLAGE FOR THE RIDE TO
INCREASE SERVICE HOURS
FREQUENCY.
THERE IS A LOT OF REALLY GOOD
OPPORTUNITIES TO HELP FOLKS
WHETHER THEY'RE NINE TO FIVE
OFFICE WORKERS OR FOLKS WORKING
IN RETAIL OR RESTAURANTS COULD
BE ABLE TO USE ALTERNATIVE
COMMUTES TO
.
>> SO THAT'S REALLY WHAT I
WANTED TO SHARE WITH YOU ALL
TODAY.
I'M HAPPY TO TAKE ANY QUESTIONS
IF THAT'S SOMETHING WE'RE DOING
IF IT'S NOT FEEL FREE TO REACH
ME AT INFORMATION AT GET
DOWNTOWN OR AND OF COURSE I
COULD NOT NOT PLUG THE COMMUTER
CHALLENGE WHICH YOU CAN
CERTAINLY STILL SIGN UP FOR AND
LOGGED TRIPS THROUGH THE END
OF THE MONTH OR YOU COULD LOG
BACK TRIPS OR IF YOU'VE ALREADY
BEEN DOING ALTERNATIVE COMMUTE
OR HAVE ANY QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS
.
IT'S A IT'S A VERY IMPORTANT
PROGRAM AND YOU GUYS DO
EXCELLENT WORK.
I LOVE THE ADVOCACY AND THE
PROGRAMS AND THE GETTING
EVERYBODY INVOLVED.
I THINK YOU GUYS DO A GREAT JOB
THOUGH AND MOLLY.
>> YEAH.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR THAT
PRESENTATION.
I DIDN'T I DIDN'T KNOW THE
HISTORY OF THAT DOWNTOWN SO
THAT WAS REALLY, REALLY
VALUABLE CONTEXT.
THIS IS I GUESS MORE JUST LIKE
FEEDBACK SINCE YOU'RE HERE
VISITING RIGHT NOW.
I DID THE WHOLE CHALLENGE AND
I'M DOING THE COMMUTER
CHALLENGE AND I THINK THEY'RE
GREAT AND IT'S BEEN GREAT FOR
BUILDING COMMUNITY AROUND
ESPECIALLY THE WINTER LIKE
GETTING UP THERE ON THE BIKE IS
NOT FUN BUT THE THE PLATFORM
WHICH MY IMPRESSION IS LIKE
IT'S A THIRD PARTY PLATFORM
THAT WE'RE USING BUT THERE ARE
SOME DEFINITELY SOME CHALLENGES
WITH USING THE PLATFORM AND
THERE'S ONE DETAIL IN
PARTICULAR THAT STOOD OUT TO ME
WHICH IS THAT IN ADDITION TO
TELLING YOU ABOUT LIKE
EMISSIONS SAVED IT ALSO CLAIMS
TO TELL YOU HOW MANY CALORIES
THAT YOU'VE BURNED AND I WOULD
REALLY LOVE TO SEE US
SEPARATING THE VALUE OF THIS
KIND OF TRANSPORTATION FROM
LIKE ANY IDEAS ABOUT WEIGHT OR
WEIGHT LOSS.
I THINK IT'S IT CAN BE HARMFUL
FOR SOME SUBSET OF THE PEOPLE
WHO ARE DOING THESE CHALLENGES.
IT CAN BE LIKE GETTING THOSE
CALORIE COUNTS CAN BE
TRIGGERING.
AND SO I WOULD LOVE IF THERE'S
IF IT'S THAT'S A SETTING WE CAN
TURN OFF THE FEEDBACK WE CAN
GIVE TO THE TO WHATEVER COMPANY
REASONING I WOULD I WOULD LOVE
THAT TO BE CONSIDERED
.
ALL RIGHT.
ANYONE ELSE PETER?
>> I WOULD JUST LIKE TO SAY
THAT I WISH NORMAL PEOPLE LIKE
MYSELF WHO COULD GET A GO PAST
EVEN THOUGH I DON'T WORK
DOWNTOWN I WOULD I WOULD REALLY
LIKE TO BE ABLE TO GET THOSE
FOR MY KIDS INSTEAD OF HAVING
TO BUY MONTHLY PASSES BECAUSE
IT FEELS LIKE ONCE A MONTH
WE'RE LATE FOR SCHOOL AND IT'S
TIME TO BUY OUR BUS PASS SO IT
WOULD BE NICE TO HAVE ONE GO
ALL YEAR LONG SO
WANT TO YEAH
ACTUALLY TAKING BACK OFF
KEITH'S COMMENT WHEN YOU LOOK
AT THE UTILIZATION OF COMPANIES
DOWNTOWN IN THAILAND IT'S GOOD
TO SEE AGAIN GREAT
PRESENTATION.
THANK YOU.
WHEN YOU SEE THE DECREASE IN
UTILIZATION OF COMPANY'S
DOWNTOWN ON A POST
COVERED BASIS AND KIND OF LIKE
STABILIZES IT INCREASES
SLIGHTLY BUT NOT BY MUCH.
THAT'S SIMILAR TO OFFICE
UTILIZATION PERIOD.
RIGHT.
WITH RESPECT TO ZOOM AND THE
WAY THAT PEOPLE ARE JUST
WORKING AND GETTING AROUND SO
IT'S REALLY AN EVALUATION
OF LIKE WHAT DOES NORMALIZED
UTILIZATION LOOK LIKE AND CAN
TO GO PAST BE EXPANDED NOT
NECESSARILY TO JUST COMPANIES
SO JUST NOT PUTTING THAT FOOD
FOR THOUGHT ABOUT THE CHANGING
PATTERNS OF OUR NORMATIVE
ATTRACTION ZONES OF LIKE JOBS
AND IT'S NOT TO SAY LIKE WE ARE
SEEING ACTUALLY INCREASED
ACTIVITY DOWNTOWN.
THEY STILL DEFINITELY WANT TO
BE DOWNTOWN.
RIGHT.
WE WANT TO CONTINUE TO CREATE
THAT INCENTIVE AND THEN MAKE
MORE ATTRACTIVE FOR PEOPLE TO
USE DIFFERENT MODES OF TRANSIT.
BUT JUST JUST FOOD FOR THOUGHT.
I MEAN I THINK FUNDAMENTALLY
OFFICE UTILIZATION HAS KIND
OF CHANGED AND SO AND MOST
COMPANIES ARE DOING THAT THREE
DAYS AND TWO DAYS REMOTE KIND
OF THING AND THAT'S WHAT SEEMS
TO BE PREVALENT.
AND SO WHEN YOU SEE THE NUMBER
OF KIND OF COMPANY ENROLLMENT
RELATIVE TO COMPANY ACTUALLY
UTILIZATION OF THOSE PASSES,
SHOULD WE BE THINKING ABOUT A
BETTER MORE EFFECTIVE WAY
OF KIND OF LIKE GETTING
RIDERSHIP ESSENTIALLY BECAUSE
LIKE ME IT'S LIKE IT'S ABOUT
INCREASING RIDERSHIP AND
CREATING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
SO CAN THERE BE DIFFERENT WAYS
TO THINK ABOUT IT JUST AGAIN
JUST MY OBSERVATIONS.
SO BUT EITHER I COULD SING AND
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION
.
I DON'T KNOW IF IT'S TYPICAL TO
RESPOND BUT YOU KIND
OF MENTIONED TO EACH OF YOU
THREE WE DID GET MOLLY SOME
FEEDBACK ON WE DID DO AN
EVALUATION OF THE THE LAST
KONKONA COLD CHALLENGE AND DID
BRING THAT FEEDBACK TO OUR
VENDOR.
THEY WERE RECEPTIVE TO A LOT
OF THE NOTES THAT WE RECEIVED
FROM PARTICIPANTS ABOUT HOW THE
PLATFORM WORK AS WELL AS ALSO
THINGS THAT WEREN'T RELATED TO
THE PLATFORM.
SO WE WILL PLAN TO DO THE SAME
THING FOR THIS CHALLENGE AND
CONTINUE TO KIND OF WORKSHOP
AND IMPROVE HOW TO MAKE IT A
SEAMLESS EXPERIENCE AND I THINK
IT IS IN ONE OF THE THE MOVING
TOWARDS ZERO TRANSPORTATION
PLAN THAT HAS ONE OF THE ITEMS
AS LOOKING INTO A SIMILAR PAST.
THE GO PASS IS BECAUSE IT IS
FUNDED BY THE VA GRANT.
THE GO PASSES ARE KIND OF WHAT
THEY ARE BUT IT'S CERTAINLY OUR
EYES ARE OPEN AND EARS ARE OPEN
FOR WHEN THERE MAY BE A CHANCE
TO SEE HOW THESE OTHER PASS
OPPORTUNITIES CAN EXPAND SO
THINGS FOR FOR CONTINUING TO
KEEP YOUR EYES EARS OPEN FOR IT
AS WELL.
RIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH, WILLIAM.
HAPPY THAT YOU WERE ABLE TO
COME AND TALK TO US TODAY.
ALL RIGHT.
SO LET'S MOVE ALONG.
WE'LL GET JUST IN TIME YOUR
NEXT ITEM IS THE RESURFACING
RELATED PROJECTS OF PROJECTS
UPDATE SO NICK WILL GIVE AN
OVERVIEW OF THE TWENTY TWENTY
THREE RESURFACING PROGRAM
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS NICK?
>> OK, THANK YOU.
LET ME SHARE MY SCREEN HERE YOU
OK?
CAN WE SEE THAT OK.
YEP OK WELL WELCOME TO THE LONG
ANTICIPATED TWENTY TWENTY THREE
STREET RESURFACING IMPROVEMENTS
PRESENTATION.
THIS SHOULD NOT TAKE VERY LONG
THE I THINK WILL BE PRETTY
BRIEF HERE SO THIS PRESENTATION
I'M GOING TO FOCUS PRIMARILY ON
OUR LOCAL STREET RESURFACING
OUR MAJOR STREETS HAVE OUR HAVE
EITHER BEEN INCLUDED IN UPDATES
ALREADY OR WE'VE DONE
PRESENTATIONS ON THEM OR
WHATNOT AND SO THIS WHOLE
FOCUSED MOSTLY ON THE LOCALS
AND MANY OF SOME OF THE MAJOR
ONES OR EVEN UNDER CONSTRUCTION
ALREADY.
SO WHEN I TALK ABOUT
RESURFACING HERE, THERE'S
THERE'S SEVERAL DIFFERENT TYPES
OF TREATMENTS THAT WE COULD BE
REFERRING TO OR THAT WE
TYPICALLY USE THAT TERM FOR.
THE FIRST ONE IS IS A
PRESERVATION TYPE TREATMENT
WHICH IS NONSTRUCTURAL.
THOSE ARE OUR OUR CAPITAL
PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE TYPE
TREATMENTS ARE KAIP SEALS OR
SLURRY SEALS CRACK SEALING
THINGS WHERE WE'RE NOT REALLY
DISTURBING THE SURFACE.
WE'RE KIND OF ADDING TO IT IN
SOME WAY OR RENEWING IT IN SOME
WAY THE SECOND TYPE IS WHAT WE
REFER TO AS RESTORATION.
THAT IS A STRUCTURAL
IMPROVEMENT AND THAT'S WHAT YOU
CAN SEE IN THE PICTURE THERE ON
THE ON THE LEFT WHERE WE DON'T
REMOVE ALL OF THE ASPHALT WE
MAY BE JUST REMOVE A COUPLE
INCHES OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT
AND THEN PUT DOWN NEW LAYER
OF ASPHALT THERE AND THEN THE
THIRD IS REHABILITATION.
THAT'S WHERE WE COMPLETELY
REMOVE THE ASPHALT SURFACE AND
REBUILD THAT ENTIRE PAVEMENT
STRUCTURE ABOVE THE BASE
.
SO SOME OF THE CORE ELEMENTS IN
OUR LOCAL STREET RESURFACING
PROGRAM FIRST OF ALL THE WHAT
WE WE USE SOME OF OUR PAVEMENT
ASSET MANAGEMENT DATA ARE PASIR
DATA THAT WE COLLECT ON
PAVEMENT CONDITIONED HELP
INFORM THAT THAT WORK AND WHERE
WE GO NEXT WITH OUR LOCAL
STREET RESURFACING PROGRAM AND
SO MAJOR STREETS LIKE I SAID
BEFORE, I'M GOING TO DISCUSS
TOO MUCH OF THAT HERE BUT THOSE
ARE PROGRAMED WITH INDIVIDUAL
PROJECTS AND OUR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
BUT LOCAL STREETS ARE USUALLY
LUMPED TOGETHER EITHER IN OUR
ANNUAL RESURFACING PROGRAM
BUCKET OR IN OUR CAPITAL
PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE AND
THOSE ARE THE TWO WAYS THAT WE
IMPLEMENT MOST OF THOSE
PROJECTS.
SO RESURFACING OF A STREET IS
TYPICALLY SOMETHING THAT'S
CONTAINED WITHIN THE EXISTING
ROAD FOOTPRINT.
SO WE'RE NOT GENERALLY DOING
ANY MAJOR HUGE CHANGES.
IT'S NOT A RECONSTRUCTION.
WE'RE NOT WIDENING.
YOU KNOW, IT'S MOSTLY A PROGRAM
THAT IS DESIGNED AROUND
IMPROVING THE CONDITION OF THAT
PAYMENT DATA COLLECTION ON
THOSE IS MINIMAL WHERE WE'RE
TYPICALLY NOT DOING ANYTHING
MAJOR LIKE TOPOGRAPHIC SURVEYS
OR THINGS LIKE THAT.
THERE'S A LITTLE BIT DISCUSSION
OF THIS EARLIER.
SO I WILL MENTION THAT
TYPICALLY WE'RE NOT COLLECTING
STREET VOLUME OR SPEED DATA ON
THESE STREETS MOST OF THE TIME
RIGHT NOW AND THEN THE DESIGN
WORK IS ALSO MINIMAL.
THERE'S VERY LITTLE ENGINEERING
WORK.
WE PUT TOGETHER A SET OF PLANS
.
THERE'S SOMETHING THAT THE
CONTRACTOR CAN BID ON BUT WE
DON'T SPEND A LOT OF TIME DOING
DESIGN.
SO ALL OF THAT HELPS KEEP SOME
OF THE COSTS DOWN AS WELL AND
THEN WE'RE TYPICALLY NOT
OBTAINING ANY ADDITIONAL RIGHT
AWAY EASEMENTS AND THINGS LIKE
THAT ON THESE TYPES OF PROJECTS
WANT TO JUMP IN HERE BUT YEAH,
I CAN I JUST A QUICK QUESTION
ABOUT HOW THE EXISTING
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC COMING
LIKE FITS WITHIN THAT LIKE
WOULD YOU SO FOR EXAMPLE WE
HAVE A PROJECT RIGHT NOW
PLANNED FOR GRANGER.
WOULD YOU DO IT?
WELL THERE IS A RESURFACING
PROJECT OR WOULD YOU BE WAITING
FOR A BIGGER PROJECT?
SO FOR FOR THE I CAN SEE THE
INSTANT MESSAGES ON THE SCREEN
RIGHT NOW.
I'M TRYING I'M TRYING TO AND
I'M TRYING TO GET BACK TO THE I
CAN'T I CAN HEAR YOU BUT I
CAN'T SEE YOU GUYS ANYMORE.
YEAH.
SO TYPICALLY WHAT WILL HAPPEN
WITH WITH TRAFFIC IS THE WHEN
WE HAVE A TRAFFIC COMING
PROJECT THAT IS COMPLETED
THROUGH THE SYSTEM, IT WILL IT
WILL BE ADDED TO THAT YEAR'S
RESURFACING PROGRAM AND THAT'S
HOW WE GO AHEAD AND IMPLEMENT
THOSE PROJECTS.
WE DON'T I GUESS LOOKING AT
THAT FROM BOTH DIRECTIONS WE
DON'T NEED TO WAIT FOR A
RESURFACING PROJECT TO COME
ALONG TO DO A TRAFFIC HAULING
PROJECT.
AND ON THE OTHER HAND, IF WE
HAVE A RESURFACING PROJECT ON A
STREET AND THERE'S INTEREST IN
TRAFFIC CALMING, WE DON'T HAVE
TO PUT THAT ON HOLD TO WAIT FOR
THE TRAFFIC TO COME ALONG
BECAUSE TYPICALLY THOSE
ELEMENTS CAN BE ADDED AFTER THE
FACT.
NOT REALLY ANY YOU KNOW, NOT
ANY REALLY ANY ADDITIONAL COST,
SAID INTERTRUST.
>> YEAH, THANK YOU.
OK, OK LET ME TRY TO GET BACK
TO ON THIS HERE OK SO SOME
OF THE OPPORTUNITIES THAT WE DO
HAVE THE I MENTIONED THAT YOU
MOSTLY WE'RE FOCUSED ON TRYING
TO GET A NEW AND IMPROVED
PAYMENT SURFACE ON THESE BUT
THERE ARE OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
THAT THAT WE TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF WHILE WE'RE DOING THIS WORK
AS WELL.
DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT IS ONE OF THEM.
WE TEND TO REPLACE A LOT OF THE
OLD STYLE STORM INLETS WITH
WITH A NEW STYLE THAT HAS A
SUMP IN THE BOTTOM THAT'S
BETTER FOR STORMWATER QUALITY.
ALSO WE UPGRADE SIDEWALK RAMPS
TO MAKE SURE THAT THEY'RE
COMPLIANT WITH THE AMERICANS
WITH DISABILITIES ACT.
THAT'S WHAT YOU SEE IN THE
PICTURE THERE ON THE SCREEN AND
ALSO THERE ARE SOME
OPPORTUNITIES THAT WE'VE TAKEN
ADVANTAGE OF IN THE PAST TO
ADVANCE US TOWARDS OUR VISION.
ZERO TRANSPORTATION PLAN AS
WELL.
AND I THINK THAT IS KIND OF A
TWO FOUR ACTUALLY BECAUSE I
THINK THAT'S ALSO A BUMP OUT AS
WELL ON GRANGER IN ADDITION TO
THE ADA SIDEWALK.
>> SO UM THEN STILL LOOKING AT
SOME OF THESE TYPICAL PROJECTS
THAT WE THAT WE DO HOW WE
IMPLEMENT THIS WORK.
THE ANNUAL STREET RESEQUENCING
PROGRAM IS THE BIGGEST ONE THAT
BIGGEST WAY THAT WE IMPLEMENT
THE STREET RESURFACING ON OUR
LOCAL STREETS AND THAT TAKES
MOST OF OUR THE STREET
RESURFACING THAT WORK THAT
WE'RE GOING TO DO IN A SINGLE
YEAR IN LUMPS THAT TOGETHER
INTO ONE PROJECT AND PUTS IT
ALL OUT AS ONE PACKAGE AND THAT
TENDS TO IN RECENT YEARS WE'VE
BEEN KIND OF MOVING TO AREA AN
AREA WITH THAT TO KIND
OF MAXIMIZE OUR EFFICIENCY I
GUESS THEN WE ALSO HAVE THE
ANNUAL STREET PREVENTATIVE
MAINTENANCE PROJECT THESE ARE
THE SLURRY SEALS, THE CAPE
SEALS.
THOSE ARE THE THINGS WE DO ON
THOSE KIND OF LITTLE CONDITION
ROADS TO MAINTAIN THEM IN GOOD
CONDITION.
AND THEN ALSO WE HAVE A LOT
OF RESURFACING ACTUALLY GETS
DONE ON STANDALONE UTILITY
PROJECTS.
SO I'LL GET INTO THAT A LITTLE
BIT MORE IN JUST A MOMENT HERE
LOOKING AT WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
BE DOING WITH THE TWENTY TWENTY
THREE STREET RESURFACING
PROJECT AND THIS IS PRIMARILY
OUR STREET MILEAGE FUNDS THAT
ARE GOING INTO THIS.
I'LL USE THIS OPPORTUNITY TO
CALL BACK TO A FEW MEETINGS AGO
WHERE I DID PRESENTATION ON OUR
DASHBOARDS THAT WE NOW HAVE.
THIS IS ACTUALLY A SCREENSHOT
FROM THAT DASHBOARD SHOWING
SOME OF THE WORK THAT WE'RE
GOING TO BE DOING IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE WITH OUR LOCAL
RESURFACING PROGRAM AND IN THAT
THIS IS KIND ONE OF THE
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT WE'RE
CONCENTRATING ON FOR TWENTY
TWENTY THREE THE RED LINES IN
THERE, THE REHABILITATION AND
THOSE WE'RE COMPLETELY
REPLACING THE PAVEMENT THE
YELLOW IS IS A PARTIAL DEPTH
RESURFACING OR CAPE SEAL TYPE
WORK AND THEN THOSE BLUE ONES
ARE SOME OF THOSE UTILITY
PROJECTS I TALKED ABOUT WHERE
WE'RE ACTUALLY REPLACING THE
WATER MAINS ON THOSE THROUGH A
COMPLETELY SEPARATE PROJECT AND
THEN ONCE THE WATER MAIN WORK
IS DONE THEN WE SPEAK ONCE THAT
WORK IS COMPLETED WE ALSO HAVE
THE ROAD BOND WHICH HAS BEEN
MENTIONED BEFORE AND WE HAVE
SOME ADDITIONAL WORK BEYOND
THAT.
IT'S BEING DONE THROUGH THE
ROAD BOND.
A LOT OF WHAT'S ON THIS LIST IS
STREETS THAT WE WEREN'T ABLE TO
DO WHEN WE WERE BACK IN SOME
PREVIOUS AREAS AND THEN WE'RE
SORT OF USING SOME OF THIS BOND
MONEY AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO
ADDRESS SOME OF THOSE THAT WE
MAYBE DIDN'T GET TO BEFORE.
AND THE I WILL SAY THE MAP ON
THE RIGHT IS A NOT
COMPREHENSIVE AND B NOT
COMPLETELY ACCURATE BECAUSE
THAT NORTHERN CORRIDOR IN
GLASTONBURY THAT SHOWS THERE IS
NOT ACTUALLY HAPPENING THIS
YEAR THAT'S ACTUALLY FUTURE
WATER PROJECTS.
BUT AGAIN THE THE DASHBOARD
SHOW THIS AND MORE IN MORE
DETAIL AND THEN WE HAVE I
MENTIONED BEFORE THE UTILITY
PROJECTS MOST OF THESE OUR
WATER MAIN REPLACEMENT PROJECTS
WHICH THEN ALSO ONCE THAT WORK
IS COMPLETED, PART OF THOSE
CONTRACTS ARE ALSO RESURFACING
THE STREETS.
SO THESE PROJECTS ARE ALL WELL
SOME OF THEM ARE LUMPED
TOGETHER BUT THEY'RE SEPARATE
FROM THE STREET RESURFACING
PROGRAM AND ARE OUR BIT OUT
SEPARATELY AS AS INDEPENDENT
PROJECTS.
AND I SAID EARLIER TO TALK
ABOUT MEIJERS BUT I AT LEAST
WANTED TO MENTION WE DO HAVE A
LOT OF WORK GOING ON ON MAJOR
ROADS THIS YEAR AS WELL AND I'M
NOT GOING TO GO THROUGH ALL
OF THAT LIST IN DETAIL BUT
THAT'S WHAT THEY ARE AND MANY
OF THESE ARE UNDERWAY ALREADY.
IN FACT, WE'VE EVEN DONE SOME
VERY EARLY SEASON PAVING ON
PLACES LIKE MAIN STREET AND CYO
CHURCH AND THEN JUST TO KIND
OF WRAP UP HERE, I WANTED TO
GIVE ONE MORE PLUG TO THAT TO
OUR WEB PAGE AND THE DASHBOARD
FIRST LINK GOES TO OUR ROAD
CONSTRUCTION PAGE AND LISTS ALL
OF THE ROAD CONSTRUCTION THAT
WE HAVE GOING ON THIS YEAR AND
ALSO THE INDIVIDUAL LINKS TO
ALL OF THOSE SEPARATE
STANDALONE PROJECTS.
IF YOU WANT TO GET TO THOSE
INDIVIDUAL WEBSITES TO LEARN
MORE INFORMATION ABOUT THEM AS
WELL.
AND THE SECOND ONE IS THE LINK
TO THAT TO STREETS DASHBOARD
THAT I HAVE THAT I SHOWED YOU A
FEW MONTHS AGO AND WE REALLY
ARE TRYING TO DIRECT AS MANY
PEOPLE THAT ARE ASKING
QUESTIONS TO THAT AS POSSIBLE
BECAUSE WE REALLY WANT THAT TO
BE KIND OF THE FACE OF OUR
STREET RESURFACING GOING
FORWARD AND KIND OF THE GO TO
PLACE FOR PEOPLE TO GO TO LOOK
WHEN YOU WANT TO SEE WHAT'S
GOING ON IN A GIVEN YEAR THIS
YEAR OR MAYBE AND EVEN THE NEXT
FEW YEARS COMING UP.
>> SO THAT'S ALL I HAVE FOR MY
PRESENTATION HERE.
I WILL OPEN IT UP TO QUESTIONS
AS SOON AS I FIGURE OUT HOW TO
GET THIS BACK.
>> I CAN MOSTLY SEE PEOPLE NOW
SO THANKS NICK AND THANKS AGAIN
FOR PLUG INTO THE DASHBOARD
PAGE.
THOSE ARE REALLY IMPORTANT.
WHAT QUESTIONS DO PEOPLE HAVE?
OK SO STOP SHARING BOTH
THEATERGOER.
GUESS I'M WONDERING ABOUT CURB
REPLACEMENTS AND WE WORK ON THE
STREETS LIKE THIS AND HOW DO WE
KNOW WHEN A PIECE OF CURB IS
SO
FAR GONE THAT IT NEEDS TO BE
REPLACED BACK THERE?
>> YEAH, THERE'S NOT THERE'S
NOT THERE'S NOT A SPEC PER SAY.
IT'S GENERALLY OUR OUR OUR
TECHNICIANS THAT ARE COLLECTING
DATA IN THE FIELD REVIEW THOSE
THINGS TO TRY TO DETERMINE HOW
MUCH CURVE WE NEED TO REPLACE.
WE TRY TO LIMIT HOW MUCH WE DO
BECAUSE IT DOES ADD A LOT
OF EXPENSE TO THE PROJECT IF WE
DO A LOT OF THE CURB TYPICALLY
WHAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR IS IF
CURB HAS BEEN MOVED, IF IT'S
SETTLED, IF IT'S BEEN LIFTED
OUT OF PLACE BY TREE ROOTS AND
ON OCCASION THAT HAPPENS THE
PRIMARY PURPOSE OF THE HERB IS
TO KEEP WATER FLOWING.
IT COLLECTS WATER OFF THE ROAD
AND THEN GETS IT TO THE STORM.
AND SO WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THAT THERE'S NOT GOING TO
BE ANY PONDING ISSUES AND
THINGS LIKE THAT.
SO THAT'S SOME OF THE PRIMARY
REASON WHY WE REPLACE CURB ON
SOME OF THESE RESURFACING
PROJECTS.
AND THEN THERE IS THE CASE IN
SOME CASES THAT FURBIES
DETERIORATED SO BADLY THAT JUST
NEEDS TO REPLACE REGARDLESS
OF WHETHER IT'S SETTLED OR
MOVED OR WHAT.
>> SO IT'S KIND OF A JUDGMENT
CALL.
OK, I GUESS I WOULD LIKE TO
ADVOCATE FOR A MORE
PRESCRIPTIVE SPECIFICATION WHEN
IT COMES TO REPLACING CURBS AND
THIS MY POINT OF VIEW HERE IS
THAT THEY SPEND A LOT OF TIME
RIDING MY BIKE NEAR THE CURB
AND WOULD LIKE TO KNOW THAT
WHEN WE'RE REDOING STREETS
WE'RE GOING TO BE LEAVING A
SMOOTH SURFACE THAT DOESN'T
HAVE CRUMBLING BITS OF CEMENT
IN IT.
SO I THINK THAT'S THE TIME TO
DO IT AS WHEN WE'RE
REHABILITATING STREETS.
THE OTHER QUESTION I HAVE ABOUT
CURBSTONE IS AS WE ADD MATERIAL
TO THE STREET LIKE HOW HOW
SMALL OF A CURB IS TOO SMALL
LIKE I I THINK OF THE CURB IS
DOING TWO THINGS YOU MENTIONED
ONE WHICH IS KEEPING WATER IN
THE STREET BUT I ALSO THINK
OF THEM AS LIKE KEEPING CARS IN
THE STREET TO AND I GUESS I
JUST FEEL LIKE THERE HAVE THERE
ARE CURBS IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD
THAT ARE VERY, VERY SMALL AND
REALLY WOULDN'T STOP ANYBODY
FROM WHO IS GOING OFF THE
STREET FROM WINDING UP IN
SOMEBODY'S YARD.
SO HOW SHORT TOO SHORT?
SO THE MOST OF THE CURVE AROUND
THE CITY IS STANDARD SIZE.
WHAT HAS HAPPENED OVER THE
YEARS IS IN THE PAST OVERLAYS
BEEN DONE IN THE CURB AND THAT
WAS REDUCED TO THE HEIGHT
OF THE CURB FACE THE VISIBLE
HEIGHT OF THE CAR SPACE THAT'S
GENERALLY A TREATMENT THAT WE
HAVE TRIED TO AVOID MORE IN
MODERN TIMES.
SOMETIMES WHEN THE STREETS ARE
ALREADY OVERLAYED WE HAVE TO
OVERLAY IT AGAIN BUT WE REALLY
HAVEN'T BEEN DOING MUCH OF IN
RECENT TIMES IS ADDING A
SIGNIFICANT OVERLAY TO THE ROAD
WHEN I TALK ABOUT ADDING THINGS
TO THE TOP AND SOME OF OUR KPM
THOSE ARE VERY THIN TREATMENTS.
>> THEY'RE USUALLY AN INCH OR
LESS AND THEY'RE USUALLY NOT
GOING INTO THE COLOURBLIND
EITHER.
BUT THEY'RE USED THERE WAS A
TYPE OF RESURFACING THAT WAS
DONE IN THE PAST A PATCH
OVERLAY WHERE YOU WOULD TAKE
THE EXISTING STREET YOU WOULD
CUT OUT LIKE PARTICULARLY BADLY
FAILING SECTIONS OF IT, FIX
THOSE AND THEN PUT A WHOLE NEW
LAYER OF ASPHALT ON TOP OF IT.
IN SOME CASES THAT'S ADDED A
LOT OF LIGHT TO THE ROAD AND
REDUCE THE CURB FACE.
SO I WOULD SAY AT THIS POINT
WE'RE REALLY NOT DOING MUCH
OF THAT.
SO IT'S IT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT
WE'RE GOING TO YOU KNOW, WE'RE
GOING TO SEE A LOT OF THAT
HAPPENING IN THE FUTURE I
GUESS.
>> OK, I THAT'S GOOD.
I WOULD LIKE THAT TO STOP NOW I
DID NOTICE UM WELL I THINK
WELDEN LAST YEAR THERE ARE WE
RESURFACED WELL AND THERE ARE
SOME CURBS THAT ARE VERY SMALL
AND VERY CRUMBLY AND I JUST
WOULD LIKE TO KNOW THAT WE HAVE
SOME GUIDELINES OR
SPECIFICATIONS THAT SAY WHEN
THEY GET TO THIS POINT WE'RE
JUST GOING TO WE'RE JUST GOING
TO PAY TO REPLACE THEM BECAUSE
THEY ARE NOT SERVING THE
PURPOSE THAT THEY'RE INTENDED
FOR.
>> YEAH, AND IT MAY DEPEND ON
WHAT KIND OF TREATMENT WE'RE
DOING ON THE ROAD THERE IF
WE'RE DOING IF THE PAVEMENT IS
IN SUCH A CONDITION, FOR
EXAMPLE, THAT WE CAN DO A MILL
INFILL TYPE TREATMENT ON IT
WHERE WE'RE NOT REMOVING ALL
OF THE ASPHALT AND WE KIND
OF ARE STUCK WITH RE OVERLAYING
THE CURVE AGAIN.
BUT YOU KNOW, WE TRY TO KEEP
THAT CERTAINLY TO A MINIMUM
EVENTUALLY IT'S GOING TO YOU
KNOW, THAT SITUATION THAT I
JUST MENTIONED WE GET TO THE
POINT YOU KNOW, A FULL
REHABILITATION WILL HAVE TO
HAPPEN WITH A ROOM ALL OF THE
ASPHALT AND THAT WOULD BE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO THEN NOT RE
OVERLY CURB.
ALL RIGHT OF QUESTIONS
, NICK.
I THINK AS THIS EVERY YEAR YOU
TALK ABOUT THE DIFFERENT
SEGMENTS OF THE CITY WHERE YOU
FOCUS ON NEIGHBORHOOD STREETS
IN THIS YEAR IT'S OVER THE
NUMBER HILLS AREA AND YOU SAY
WHERE THE NEXT COUPLE OF YEARS
ARE GOING TO BE IS THERE A MAP
OR A PLAN I CAN IT'S ON THAT
DASHBOARD.
>> I OK OK GREAT.
>> I WILL REFER YOU AGAIN TO
THAT DASHBOARD.
IT'S ON LIKE I THINK THERE'S
THERE'S SEVERAL TABS THAT YOU
CAN CLICK ON THERE FOR CURRENT
YEAR AND THERE'S LIKE ONE FOR
UPCOMING YEARS AS WELL AND I
THINK NEXT YEAR WE'RE OVER.
WE HAVEN'T FIGURED OUT MORE
PRECISE AREAS BUT OVER BACK ON
THE NORTHWEST SIDE OF TOWN
AGAIN THAT WAS WITH THE YOU
WERE JUST THERE LAST YEAR SO
TWO OUT OF THE THREE YEARS ARE
IN THE SAME AREA.
>> YEAH.
AND THAT'S FOLLOWING THE DATA
THAT WE HAVE ON THE PACER
RATINGS WE'RE FOLLOWING THE
PLACES WHERE WE HAVE THE WORST
STREETS BASICALLY.
>> SO OK.
ANYTHING ELSE DERMO HOW DID
THINGS GET UPDATED JUST LAST
YEAR AND I'M SURE THAT THIS
HAPPENS EVERY YEAR.
YOU KNOW THE BEST LAID PLANS
SOMETIMES THINGS GET PUSHED OUT
AND YOU KNOW, LAST I JUST
REMEMBER ON THE LIST NOT THE
DASHBOARD BUT THE HTML PAGE
THAT YOU GUYS MAINTAIN THE WEB
PAGE WITH THE LIST.
YOU KNOW, I OUTSIDE OF CHURCH
UP THERE FOR A LONG TIME EVEN
PAST WHEN WE KNEW IT WASN'T
GOING TO HAPPEN.
SO I'M JUST WONDERING LIKE WITH
THE DASHBOARD OR THINGS WERE
UPDATED OR YEAH.
>> WE'RE DEFINITELY TRYING TO
MAKE THAT THE THE WAY THAT WE
GO ABOUT UPDATING THINGS ON
THAT MAP RATHER ON THAT STATIC
LIST.
SO NOT TO GET TOO FAR DOWN IN
THE WEEDS HERE BUT YOU KNOW,
EVERY ONE OF THE PROJECTS THAT
YOU SEE ON THERE HAS A PROJECT
MANAGER ATTACHED TO IT.
SO I MEAN REALLY IT'S SOMETHING
THAT I'M TRYING TO STRESS TO
OUR PROJECT MANAGERS TO FOR
DIRECTING PEOPLE TO THAT
DASHBOARD AND WE EXPECT IT TO
BE RELATIVELY UP TO DATE, MAYBE
NOT UP TO THE DAY UP TO THE
SECOND BUT THAT THEY NEED TO
GET THE INFORMATION TO THE
PERSON WHO UPDATES THAT WE DO
HAVE SOMEBODY IN OUR OFFICE
WORKING IN OUR SYSTEMS PLANNING
DEPARTMENT THAT IS DOING ALL
THE UPDATING.
SO AS LONG AS WE GET THEM THE
INFORMATION IT'LL BE PRETTY UP
TO PRETTY TO DATE.
>> THANK YOU.
>> AND I WOULD ADD TO THAT
SOMETIMES ON THAT ON WE HAVE A
LIST OF PROJECTS ON THAT PAGE
OFTEN BECAUSE WE WANT TO
MAINTAIN THE LINKS TO WHERE
THOSE PROJECT PAGES ARE EVEN IF
THE PROJECT ISN'T HAPPENING
THIS YEAR WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THAT LINK IS STILL THERE
BECAUSE IT COULD STILL BE
ACTIVE FROM LIKE A PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT STANDPOINT, THINGS
LIKE THAT AS WELL.
>> SO ALL RIGHT.
THANKS, NICK.
LOOK FORWARD TO THIS YEAR.
YOU'RE WELCOME.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT TOPIC I THINK IT HOPEFULLY
WILL BE A QUICK ONE VISION ZERO
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE AS THE
WORK TO DEVELOP THE VISIONS OR
IMPLEMENTATION AND STRATEGY
DRAWS TO A CLOSE THE VISION
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE
PRIMARY CHARGE WILL BE
FULFILLED.
WE BELIEVE SO.
RAYMOND AND JULIE WHO IS THE
CHAIR THAT COMMITTEE CAN RECAP
SOME OF OUR DISCUSSION ABOUT
ITS FUTURE AND AND ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS OR IF YOU WANT TO
HAVE ANY DISCUSSION ABOUT
DISSOLVING THE COMMITTEE AFTER
OUR NEXT MEETING WHICH I THINK
IS IN JUNE.
>> YEAH.
BRETT, THANKS FOR TAKING THAT
UP AND JULIE, SORRY FOR
SPRINGING THIS ON YOU.
>> I JUST KIND OF LISTED YOU ON
THE AGENDA BECAUSE YOU THAT'S
NAME AND SO YEAH WE JUST WANTED
TO KIND OF KEEP YOU UP TO DATE
THE VISION ZERO JUST AS BRETT
OUTLINED A LOT OF THAT WORK HAS
BEEN PEGGED TO THE WORK THAT
SAME SCHWARTZ THE CONSULTANT IS
DOING FOR THEIR CONTRACT IS
COMING TO A CLOSE AND SO AT THE
NEXT MEETING THEY'RE GOING TO
KIND OF HAND OVER ALL THEIR
FINAL DELIVERABLES AND
FORECASTING THAT WE HAD A
DISCUSSION WITH VISION ZERO
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE ABOUT
THE DESIRE TO CONTINUE TO MEET
OR MAYBE CHANGE FOCUS OR MAYBE
SUNSET AND JULIE AND BRETT WERE
THERE FOR THAT DISCUSSION.
>> I THINK THERE SEEM TO BE
SOME CONSENSUS THAT THE GOOD
WORK THAT THIS COMMISSION IS
DOING, THERE DIDN'T SEEM TO BE
AN OVERWHELMING NEED OR DESIRE
TO CONTINUE TO HAVE A
SUBCOMMITTEE WHERE THERE'S A
LOT OF OVERLAP BETWEEN THE SORT
OF PROJECTS THAT THEY'RE
REVIEWING AND WHAT WE BRING
FORWARD TO THIS COMMISSION.
SO IT SEEMED LIKE MOST OF THOSE
COMMITTEE MEMBERS WERE
SUPPORTIVE OF ONE.
THOSE FINAL DELIVERABLES ARE
RECEIVED TO CEASE TO MEET AFTER
THAT SO LITTLE TABLE SETTING
FOR JULIE TO FILL IN ANY BLANKS
BEYOND THAT AND GIVEN THE
IMPRESSIONS SHE HAD ON THAT
DISCUSSION, YEAH, I'LL JUST ADD
THAT THE CONCERN BOTH BRETT AND
I RAISED DURING THE DISCUSSION
WAS THAT THERE WOULD BE A LOT
OF OVERLAP BETWEEN THE
DISCUSSIONS THAT HAPPENED
THERE
AND IN THIS COMMISSION MEETING
AND AND THAT WAS ALREADY
STARTING TO HAPPEN A LITTLE BIT
AND ON THE OTHER HAND, THE ALL
OF THE COMMITTEE MEMBERS
EXPRESSED A WILLINGNESS TO
CONTINUE IF THEY WERE NEEDED.
AND I JUST WANT TO SAY THAT
THEY WERE GREAT COMMITTEE
MEMBERS AND IF WE IF WE NEED
THEM FOR SOMETHING ELSE, THEY
SEEM TO BE READY AND WILLING TO
GO RIGHT?
YEAH, I THINK WE'RE EXPECTING
THE FINAL DELIVERABLES FROM THE
FROM SAM SCHWARTZ IN THE COMING
WEEKS AND AT OUR NEXT MEETING
IS SCHEDULED FOR JUNE.
SO I THINK THE PLAN IS TO
REVIEW AND RECEIVE THOSE AND
YOU KNOW THERE THERE IS NO
REQUIREMENT FOR THE COMMISSION
HERE TO FORMALLY DO ANYTHING TO
THE COMMITTEE.
BUT WE JUST WANTED TO BRING IT
FORWARD HERE TO LET EVERYBODY
KNOW THAT THAT'S OUR PLAN.
ANYTHING ELSE?
>> MOLLY?
I JUST HAVE A QUICK QUESTION.
I FEEL LIKE IN CONVERSATIONS
OVER THE LAST YEAR OR TWO ABOUT
OUR TRANSPORTATION PLAN SAYS
ALL THESE GREAT THINGS BUT WHY
LIKE WHY ARE PROJECTS STILL
COMING FORWARD WHERE WE'RE NOT
USING THE FULL SUITE OF THINGS
IN THERE?
AND THE ANSWER WAS ALWAYS WELL
OR WAIT THERE'S THIS VISION
ZERO COMMITMENT COMMITTEE AND
THERE'S SCHWARTZ AND WE'RE
WAITING FOR THAT WORK TO BE
DONE AND I GUESS MY QUESTION
FOR THE COMMITTEE MEMBERS IS DO
YOU FEEL LIKE WE'RE AT THE
POINT WHERE WE'RE GOING TO BE
ABLE TO USE ALL THE TOOLBOX?
IS THAT DO YOU FEEL LIKE THAT
PIECE OF THE WORK IS WHERE WE
WANT THAT WE NEED NEEDED TO BE
?
YEAH, I MEAN THE A BIG PIECE
OF IT IS MAJOR STREETS COMING
WHICH IS NOW CALLED SOMETHING
ELSE BUT BUT I MEAN THAT SEEMS
TO BE READY TO GO THAT THAT THE
PRIORITIZATION FOR THAT WAS ONE
OF THE SORT OF BIGGEST TOPICS
OF CONVERSATION DURING THE
COMMITTEE AND IT'S SOMETHING
THAT SAM SCHWARTZ THOUGHT ABOUT
A LOT IN RESPONSE TO OUR
COMMENTS.
IT SEEMS LIKE IT'S READY TO GO
BUT YOU KNOW, LET'S SEE IT
HAPPEN.
I ASSUME THE PROJECT WILL COME
TO THIS COMMISSION AS THE
YES
INDEED.
AND SPEED MANAGEMENT IS THE
KIND OF NEW TERM WE'VE GIVEN
IT.
SO BUT YEAH, JOSEFSSON RIGHT.
I THINK THE WORK OF THAT
SUBCOMMITTEE WAS FOCUSED ON THE
MECHANICS AND THEN WHEN WE ROLL
OUT TOWARDS IMPLEMENTATION
STARTING UP SOME OF THOSE
PROJECTS, WE WOULD DEFINITELY
BRING THOSE BEFORE THE HAD THE
GOAL IS TO MAKE SURE THAT
PROCESSES AND PROCEDURES ARE
ALIGNED WITH THE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN AND THAT SOME NORMS ARE
SET.
AND I THINK WHAT YOUR COMMITTEE
HAS IS BRINGING FORWARD IS A
BIG PART THAT THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM IS A BIG
PART OF THAT.
BUT WE DIDN'T WE WANTED TO MAKE
SURE WE WEREN'T STARTING TO GET
INTO IMPLEMENTAL ON A PROJECT
BY PROJECT LEVEL BECAUSE THOSE
ARE THINGS THAT FRANKLY COME
HERE OR SHOULD WE REALLY IN A
SUBCOMMITTEE THAT WE ARE HAPPY
WITH THE FORTHCOMING DIRECTIVES
AND MEMOS THE MORE DETAILED
WORK THE SAME SHWARTZ AS HAS
BEEN DOING AND WITH WHAT WE'VE
SEEN IMPLEMENTED BY CITY STAFF
SO THEN I GUESS MY QUESTION
THEN FOR STAFF IS ABOUT THE
TIMELINE.
SO EVERYTHING'S BEEN PUT OUT
FOR THIS YEAR SO WE KNOW THAT
NONE OF THIS STUFF IS GOING TO
GO INTO THIS YEAR'S PROJECTS.
BUT ARE WE ON A TIMELINE TO
WHERE NEXT YEAR WE'VE GOT ALL
THE TOOLS?
>> THAT IS OUR HOPE.
YEAH, I THINK BETWEEN THE SAFE
STREETS FOR ALL GRANT THAT WE
GOT SOME OF THE OTHER FUNDING
SOURCES WE FEEL LIKE WE'RE
GOING TO BE A VERY GOOD
POSITION TO START IMPLEMENTING
THIS WORK AND ESPECIALLY IN
THIS NEXT CASE THE NEXT
CONSTRUCTION SEASON.
SO YES, THAT IS VERY MUCH WHAT
WE ARE WORKING TOWARDS.
THANK YOU.
ANYONE ELSE LOOKING AT THE TIME
RAYMOND, I WANT TO GET YOUR
THOUGHTS ON THE NEXT TOPIC, THE
NEXT THE LAST BIG TOPIC WHICH
IS ALL AGES AND ABILITIES LIKE
FACILITIES.
I HAVEN'T SEEN THE MATERIALS
FOR THIS.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT YOU'RE
PLANNING FOR IT.
IS IT SOMETHING THAT YOU THINK
WE SHOULD TRY TO FIT IT IN HERE
AND RUN A LITTLE BIT OVER OUR
MEETING TIME OR DO YOU THINK WE
SHOULD PUSH IT BECAUSE YOU'RE
GOING TO ACTUALLY BE GONE FOR
JUNE, AREN'T YOU?
I AM SO YEAH, I CAN GET THROUGH
THE PRESENTATION IN ABOUT TEN
MINUTES.
A LOT OF IT'S JUST KIND OF SOME
OVERVIEW AND THEN I'LL TALK
ABOUT NEXT STEPS WHAT WE'RE
TEEING UP.
SO IT REALLY IT'S UP TO THE
COMMISSION TO SEE IF THEY WANT
TO CARRY ON PAST NINE OR NOT
BUT I THINK GIVEN THAT YOU'RE
GOING TO BE GONE NEXT MONTH
THEN MAYBE IT IS IS IT OK WITH
PEOPLE TO GO FIVE OR TEN
MINUTES OVER?
>> OK, ALL RIGHT.
LET'S DO ERM
OK HOPEFULLY MY
SCREEN SHARING.
>> YEP.
ALL RIGHT SO WHAT I'LL DO IS
I'LL JUST KIND OF GIVE A VERY
BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE PLAN
ITSELF.
SO JUST AS A REMINDER THE THE
MOVING TOGETHER THE ZERO
TRANSPORTATION PLAN HAS KIND
OF FIVE MOBILITY GOALS AND
VALUES SAFETY MOBILITY
ACCESSIBILITY FOR ALL HEALTHY
PEOPLE AND PLACES AND HEALTHY
PEOPLE AND SUSTAINABLE PLACES
AND REGIONAL CONNECTIVITY.
THEN THE PROJECTS OR THE PLAN
IS THEN BROKEN DOWN INTO TWENTY
TWO KIND OF KEY MOBILITY
STRATEGIES AND THE SIXTH ONE
OF THOSE IS TO BUILD OUT A SAFE
AND COMFORTABLE NETWORK OF BIKE
RIDES FOR PEOPLE OF ALL AGES
AND ABILITIES.
SO SPECIFICALLY WHAT THIS CALLS
FOR IS WE OFTEN REFER TO THE
MAP SO THE MAP IS PICTURED HERE
ON THE SCREEN HAS A LOT
OF LINES ON IT THAT SHOW KIND
OF AN INTERCONNECTED WEB
OF BIKE FACILITIES, MOST
OF WHICH ARE PURPLE WHICH ARE
TO BE BUILT PROPOSED ALL AGES
ABILITY.
SO THAT MAY MEAN THAT THEIR
EXISTING BIKE LANES OR SOME
SORT OF BIKE FACILITY THERE BUT
THEY DON'T QUITE MEET THE
THRESHOLD WHAT WE CONSIDER AN
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES.
OTHER ARE SOME OF THE OTHER
LINES ARE BRAND NEW LINES ON
THE MAP WHICH INDICATE THAT
THERE'S NOTHING THERE NOW AND
SO WE WOULD LOOK TO RETROFIT OR
INSTALL SOMETHING MOVING
FORWARD.
I WILL SAY WE CONSULT THIS MAP
ON A REGULAR BASIS FOR ANY
CAPITAL PROJECT WE REFER TO A
PROJECT MANAGERS TO IT SO IT
DOES INFLUENCE A LOT OF THE
WORK THAT WE DO.
AND SO THE STRATEGY
SPECIFICALLY SAYS TO BUILD A
SAFE, COMFORTABLE NETWORK
OF BIKE ROUTES FOR PEOPLE
OF ALL AGES AND ABILITIES AND
IT SETS KIND OF THREE TARGETS.
THE FIRST IS TO INSTALL FIVE
MILES OF NEW OR UPGRADED ALL
AGES AND ABILITY TO ROUTES EACH
YEAR.
THE SECOND IS TO COMPLETE THE
FULL ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
BIKE NETWORK BY TWENTY THIRTY
FIVE AND THE THIRD IS TO
IMPLEMENT A COMPLETE WAYFINDING
SYSTEM BY TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
SO THEN THE PLAN GOES INTO THE
DIFFERENT TYPES OF FACILITIES
AND IT TALKS ABOUT THE
DIFFERENT FIRST IT TALKS ABOUT
THE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF ROADWAY'S AND THEN WHAT KIND
OF FACILITIES WOULD BE
APPROPRIATE ON THOSE AND THEN
GIVE SOME DESCRIPTIONS BELOW
THEM.
SO THE FIRST IS LOOKING AT
TOOLS ON LOCAL STREETS OR WHAT
YOU MIGHT CONSIDER NEIGHBORHOOD
STREET.
SO THESE ARE LOW VOLUME, LOW
SPEED.
TWENTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR LESS
LESS THAN THREE THOUSAND
VEHICLES PER DAY.
THE FIRST SORT OF TREATMENT
THAT'S IDENTIFIED IS A BIKE
BOULEVARD AND THE BIKE
BOULEVARD IS DESCRIBED AS
HAVING CLEAR SIGNAGE AND
DESIGNING FEATURES THAT
DISCOURAGE VEHICULAR TRIPS,
DESIGN FEATURES THAT ENCOURAGE
SAFE SPEEDS AND FEATURES THAT
ALSO FACILITATE A CLEAR AND
COMFORTABLE EXPERIENCE.
SO IN THE PICTURE THERE'S THIS
IS AN EXAMPLE OF A BIKE
BOULEVARD WHERE BICYCLISTS ARE
ALLOWED TO TRAVERSE DOWN A ROAD
WHEREAS VEHICLES ARE PROHIBITED
FROM GOING.
SO YOU CAN KIND OF SEE A SIGN
THAT SAYS PROHIBITED PROHIBITED
MOVEMENT EXCEPT FOR BICYCLISTS
,SHARED LANE MARKINGS OR WHAT
ARE OFTEN CALLED SHIRO'S ARE
ALSO AN ACCEPTABLE TOOL IN THE
PLAN.
AGAIN, THIS IS FOR LOCAL
NEIGHBORHOOD STREETS SO THEY
HELP DESIGNATED PREFERRED ROUTE
FOR CYCLISTS AND CAN RAISE THE
AWARENESS OF PEOPLE BIKING
AMONG CYCLISTS THEMSELVES BUT
THEN ALSO ON MOTORISTS.
SO THIS IS KIND OF A VERY LOW
BARRIER TO ENTRY SORT OF BIKE
FACILITY FOR IMPLEMENTATION.
IT'S JUST LARGELY PAVEMENT
MARKINGS MAY BE ACCOMMODATED
WITH SOME SIGNAGE AS WELL.
THEN WE HAVE KIND OF MOVING UP
A TIER SO FROM MINOR STREETS.
SO THESE ARE ROADS THAT MIGHT
BE BETWEEN TWENTY FIVE AND 30
MILES PER HOUR BUT NOT A LOT
OF TRAFFIC, MAYBE LESS THAN TEN
THOUSAND VEHICLES PER DAY AND
THE TYPES OF FACILITIES THERE I
THINK THREE OR FOUR DIFFERENT
TYPES OF FACILITIES.
THE FIRST THAT'S IDENTIFIED IS
KIND OF THE TRADITIONAL STRIPED
OF FACILITY JOUR A WHILE AGO
DEMARCATES A CERTAIN PORTION
OF THE STREET FOR RECYCLING IT
MAY INCLUDE KIND OF LIKE GREEN
PIGMENT THAT WE HAVE A CONFLICT
POINTS AND IT'S MOST
APPROPRIATE ON STREETS WITH LOW
TO MODERATE SPEEDS VOLUMES
TAKING THAT UP A NOTCH AGAIN
LOOKING AT MINOR STREETS YOU
CAN TAKE THAT BIKE LANE AND IF
YOU HAVE THE ROOM YOU CAN
BUFFER IT WITH PAINT.
SO YOU KIND OF ADD ANOTHER LINE
PARALLEL TO IT WITH MAYBE SOME
HASH MARKS IN BETWEEN.
SO AGAIN, IT DEMARCATES
PORTION
OF THE STREET BUT IT GIVES A
GREATER SEPARATION BETWEEN THE
CYCLIST AND THE MOTOR VEHICLES.
THERE'S NOT JUST A SINGLE LINE
THERE MIGHT BE TWO LINES WITH
SOME ADDITIONAL SPACE BETWEEN
THEM AND AGAIN THIS IS
APPROPRIATE STREETS TO LOW TO
MODERATE SPEEDS AND VOLUMES
OF THERE'S ALSO THE CONCEPT
OF CONTRAFLOW BIKE LANES.
THE IDEA HERE IS THAT YOU WOULD
HAVE A BIKE LANE THAT GOES KIND
OF AGAINST TRAFFIC ON A ONE WAY
STREET SO IT PROVIDES A TWO WAY
BICYCLE FACILITY ON A ONE WAY
STREET.
BUT IN DOING SO YOU HAVE TO
CONSIDER SOME PROTECTIVE
ELEMENTS TO ENSURE THAT
ONCOMING VEHICLES KIND
OF RESPECT THAT BICYCLISTS
REALM AND THIS IS MOSTLY
APPROPRIATE WHERE THERE ARE FEW
TURNING CONFLICTS SO IN THE
PICTURE YOU CAN KIND OF SEE ON
THE NEAR SIDE OF THE PICTURE
THE THE THE CONTRAFLOW PORTION
OF THE BIKE LANE.
RIGHT.
BECAUSE THIS IS A ONE WAY
STREET BUT YOU CAN SEE KIND
OF THE CORRESPONDING WITH
DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC BIKE LANE
ON THE OPPOSITE SIDE OF THE
STREET.
>> AND THEN WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
STEPPING UP TO A DIFFERENT ROAD
TYPE NOW WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
TOOLS FOR MAJOR STREETS.
SO THESE ARE STREETS THAT HAVE,
YOU KNOW, POSTED SPEED LIMITS
OF THIRTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR
OR GREATER AND MORE THAN TEN
THOUSAND VEHICLES PER DAY.
SO AGAIN, YOU CAN KIND
OF FOLLOW THE SPECTRUM AND SORT
OF GRADUATED APPROACH TO HOW WE
WOULD IMPLEMENT FACILITIES.
>> SO THE FIRST IS A PROTECTED
BIKE LANE.
THE IDEA IS THAT THESE RUN AT
STREET LEVEL AND THEY PROVIDE
SOME SORT OF PHYSICAL
SEPARATION FROM THE VEHICLES IN
THE FORM OF FLEXIBLE DELINEATOR
PARKING LANES CURBS OR CONCRETE
MEDIANS OR PLANTERS.
AND THE ONE THING TO NOTE IS
THAT SPECIAL ATTENTION AT
INTERSECTIONS SHOULD BE MADE OR
WHERE THERE ARE BUS ROUTES
WHERE PASSENGERS ARE BOARDING
AND LIGHTING THE BUSSES TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE NOT SETTING
CONFLICT POINTS THAT MIGHT POSE
A SAFETY CONCERN FOR EITHER
CYCLISTS, PEDESTRIANS OR
MOTORISTS.
ONE THING I DO WANT TO KNOW
WHILE I'M ON THE SLIDE A
PROTECTED BIKE LANE DOES NOT
NECESSARILY HAVE TO BE A
BIDIRECTIONAL CYCLE TRACK LIKE
THE ONE THAT'S PICTURED.
IT IS THE FOURTH STREET OR I'M
SORRY IT'S THE WILLIAM STREET
CYCLE TRACK AT 47TH STREET.
YOU CAN STILL HAVE A PROTECTED
BIKE LANE AND IT JUST BE SINGLE
DIRECTION BUT IT STILL HAS TO
HAVE THOSE SORT OF VERTICAL
ELEMENTS THAT PROVIDE THAT
PHYSICAL SEPARATION FROM THE
VEHICLES.
>> THERE'S ALSO ANOTHER CONCEPT
SIMILAR TO THE CYCLE TRACK
WHERE THE PROTECTED BIKE LANE
WHERE YOU HAVE A RAISED BIKE
LANE SO THIS IS WHERE YOU
ACTUALLY TAKE THE ELEVATION
OF THE BIKE LANE AND BRING IT
UP TO SIDEWALK LEVEL.
OBVIOUSLY YOU NEED TO MAKE SURE
THAT THERE'S CLEAR SEPARATION
BETWEEN PEOPLE WHO ARE WALKING
AND BIKING.
BUT THE IDEA IS THAT, YOU KNOW,
THE CYCLIST IS A LITTLE BIT
MORE ELEVATED, A LITTLE BIT
MORE VISIBLE AND THEN JUST THE
SHEER FACT THAT THE BIKE
FACILITY IS RAISED PROVIDES
THAT VERTICAL SEPARATION FROM
THE VEHICULAR TRAVELING
AND
THEN ALSO FOUR MAJOR STREETS
YOU HAVE OFF STREET SHARED USE
PATHS OR SOMETIMES CALLED SIDE
PATHS.
SO THIS IS A BIKE AND HEAD
FACILITY THAT'S PHYSICALLY
SEPARATED FROM VEHICLES EITHER
BY SOME SORT OF OPEN SPACE OR
BARRIER.
IT TENDS TO COMPLIMENT ON
STREET ROUTES AND WHAT THAT
MEANS IS IF YOU THINK ABOUT THE
BORDER TO BOARD A TRAIL WHICH
IS PICTURED ON THE SLIDE, IT
CAN ACT LIKE A SPINE AND THEN
FROM THAT SPINE YOU CAN THEN
RADIATE OUT OTHER FACILITIES
WHETHER THAT BE THE BIKE LANES
OR THE PROTECTED AREAS THAT WE
SPOKE ABOUT EARLIER AND WHEN
DONE REALLY WELL IT CAN HELP
FACILITATE LONG DISTANCE
COMMUTING SUCH AS THE BORDER TO
BORDER TRAIL CAN CONNECT AND
IPSI FOR EXAMPLE.
>> AND SO WITH THOSE FACILITIES
OF MINES JUST TO WHAT'S COMING
UP NEXT, THE FIRST THING THAT
WE ARE FOCUSED ON IS LOOKING AT
OUR NETWORK OF BUFFORD BIKE
LANES AND UPGRADING THOSE TWO
PROTECTED BIKE LANES.
WE FEEL THIS IS A PRETTY LOW
HANGING FRUIT.
WE ALREADY HAVE THE PHYSICAL
SEPARATION ESTABLISHED BUT IT
DOESN'T INCLUDE THE VERTICAL
ELEMENTS.
SO WHAT WE CAN DO IS RETROFIT
THAT SORT OF BUFFER AREA THAT
CURRENTLY EXISTS AND PUT IN
SOME SORT OF VERTICAL
DELINEATION PROBABLY PLASTIC
POSTS OR PLASTIC DELINEATOR
JUST BECAUSE THOSE ARE
MATERIALS THAT ARE READILY
AVAILABLE.
THEY DON'T REQUIRE A LOT
OF DESIGN AND ENGINEERING.
THEY CAN BE DEPLOYED PRETTY
READILY WITH THE KNOW HOW THAT
WE HAVE BOTH AMONG STAFF AS
WELL AS WITH CONTRACTORS.
THE OTHER THING TO NOTE AND
YOU'VE BEEN HEARING A LOT
OF THESE REPORTS MONTH TO MONTH
IS AS I MENTIONED EARLIER WE
ARE TRYING TO TAKE SERIOUSLY
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS AND
INCORPORATION OF THESE
FACILITIES INTO THE CAPITAL
PROJECTS THAT ARE BEING DONE.
SO THERE ARE A LOT OF PROJECTS
THAT ARE GOING TO INCORPORATE
IN ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
FACILITIES SO AREHART STATE
MILLER PLANS ARE ALL GOING TO
HAVE PROTECTED BIKE FACILITIES
AS PART OF THAT IMPLEMENTATION
.
7TH STREET IN GREENVIEW WILL
HAVE AN ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
FACILITY TOO BUT IT MAY BE A
LESSER TYPE FACILITY BECAUSE
LIKE I SAID BEFORE, WHEN WE
TALK ABOUT LOCAL NEIGHBORHOOD
STREETS IT MAY NOT RISE TO THE
LEVEL OF A SORT OF PROTECTED OR
VERTICAL SEPARATED BIKE
FACILITY BUT SOME OF THE
CONVERSATIONS AND THE OUTREACH
WE'RE DOING NOW ARE REALLY
TRYING TO HONE IN ON WHAT THAT
FACILITY COULD LOOK LIKE AND
WHAT IMPLEMENTATION OF THAT
WOULD WOULD BE IN THOSE
NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> AND THEN THE OTHER THING IS
COUNCIL DID APPROVE A LITTLE
WHILE AGO A COUPLE OF MONTHS
AGO THE NEW MAINTENANCE THIS IS
ACTUALLY A PICTURE OF THE
EQUIPMENT.
THIS IS A THE STREET SWEEPER
THAT CAN GO IN AREAS AS NARROW
AS FOUR FEET WIDE AND THIS IS
IMPORTANT BECAUSE WE'RE KIND
OF BEEN WAITING ON THIS PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT FOR WE START
STALLING A LOT OF THOSE
VERTICAL DELINEATOR IS BECAUSE
WE DON'T WANT TO SET UP THE
FACILITY FOR FAILURE WHERE WE
PUT IN ALL THESE VERTICAL
DEVICES AND THEN WE'RE NOT ABLE
TO MAINTAIN IT.
SO THE LAST I HEARD THIS PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT HAS BEEN ORDERED
WAS ALREADY KIND OF TEED BEFORE
COUNCIL EVEN APPROVED IT,
APPROVED IT AND IT'S BEEN
APPROVED.
SO THE ORDER HAS BEEN MADE
OFFICIAL.
IT'S STILL GOING TO TAKE SOME
TIME AND MY UNDERSTANDING LAST
I HEARD IT'S GOING TO BE
DELIVERED IN SEPTEMBER.
BUT WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO IN
THE MEANTIME AS I JUST
MENTIONED, WE'RE WORKING ON THE
DESIGN OF THE FACILITIES TO
UPGRADE AS PREFERRED BIKE LANES
AND THE HOPE IS THAT THERE WILL
BE A NICE CONVERGENCE OF ALL
THESE THINGS WHERE THE STREET
SWEEPER AND THE INSTALLATION
OF THE VERTICAL DEVICES ON
THOSE BUFFORD BIKE LANES WILL
HAPPEN KIND OF SEAMLESSLY AND
AND AND WE'LL GET THOSE DONE BY
THE END OF THIS CALENDAR YEAR.
>> IT'S WHAT WE'RE SHOOTING FOR
.
>> I THINK I MADE IT IN LIKE 11
MINUTES.
MY APOLOGIES.
SO THAT'S THE LAST OF MY
SLIDES.
I'M HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN ANY
QUESTIONS YOU MIGHT HAVE
QUESTIONS FOR
PETER WHO ARE
PLAN CALLS FOR FIVE MILES PER
YEAR?
HOW HOW ARE WE DOING ON THE
TOWARDS THAT GOAL AND HOW DO WE
EXPECT TO DO NEXT YEAR LIKE ARE
ALL THE PIECES GOING TO BE IN
PLACE SO THAT WE GET FIVE OR
FIVE MILES THIS YEAR?
>> YEAH, I MEAN IF WE DO THE
ELEVEN MILES THAT WE'RE
PLANNING WE'LL HAVE CAUGHT UP
FROM LAST YEAR WHERE WE DIDN'T
DO ANY AND THEN WE'LL HAVE
WE'LL HAVE AN EXTRA MILE TO
SPARE BUT WE'RE GOING TO BANK
FOR THE YEAR IN THE FUTURE IT
IS A TARGET.
I'M NOT GOING TO SIT HERE WITH
A STRAIGHT FACE AND SAY WE'RE
GOING TO HIT FIVE MILES EVERY
YEAR.
FIVE MILES IS PRETTY AMBITIOUS
CONSIDERING THE SORT OF TRACK
RECORD WE'VE HAD IN THE PAST
AND HOW MUCH EFFORT HAS GONE
INTO GETTING CONSENSUS OR AT
LEAST SUPPORT TO IMPLEMENT
THESE PROJECTS.
BUT WE ARE GOING TO TRY TO MOVE
THESE THINGS ALONG AS FAST AS
WE CAN.
SO WE'RE GOING AFTER THE LOW
HANGING FRUIT FIRST BUT THEY'RE
GOING TO A LOT OF DIFFICULT
DECISIONS ON FACILITIES IN THE
FUTURE.
SO SO WHAT'S THE RIGHT WAY FOR
US TO CHECK IN PROGRESS TO THE
11 MILES AND RAYMOND I MEAN IS
CAN CAN I BE A LINE ITEM IN
YOUR IN YOUR STAFF REPORT?
>> YEAH, I MEAN YEAH I'LL
DEFINITELY DO THAT.
WE SHOULD DEFINITELY GIVE YOU
AN UPDATE ON THE PROGRESS
THAT'S BEING MADE.
I MEAN TYPICALLY WHAT I DO FOR
THOSE STAFF REPORTS IS I WAIT
FOR MAJOR MILESTONES LIKE
DESIGN IS COMPLETE PROJECTS OUT
TO BID SOMETHING SHOWS KIND
OF WHERE WE ARE WORKING IS
GOING TO OCCUR.
THAT'S WHEN WE'LL WE'LL GIVE
YOU UPDATES AND THAT'S COME TO
YOU WITH THIRTY PERCENT DESIGN
.
>> FIFTY PERCENT DESIGN.
SIXTY PERCENT DESIGN SOURCE
OF I GUESS WHAT I'M WHAT I'M
GOING FOR IS IF WE'RE NOT IF
WE'RE NOT ON TRACK I'D LIKE TO
I'D LIKE THAT TO BE SHARED LIKE
WHAT'S WHAT'S THE RIGHT WAY TO
SHARE THAT WE'RE NOT ON TRACK
AND WE NEED A COURSE CORRECTION
WE NEED TO ASK FOR HELP.
IS YOUR IS YOUR STAFF REPORT
THE RIGHT PLACE IF IT HAPPENS
LIKE IF WE DO GET OFF TRACK?
I THINK I THINK YOU COULD
ANSWER THAT OK, I GUESS I WOULD
LIKE TO SEE WHETHER OR NOT
WE'RE ON TRACK.
IT CAN BE A YES OR NO ANSWER IN
YOUR STAFF REPORT.
THAT'S WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
ALTHOUGH WE DO HAVE THIS
AMBITIOUS GOAL OF ELEVEN MILES.
ARE WE ON TRACK TO IT STILL?
YES.
IF WE DO THE ELEVEN MILES THIS
YEAR YES.
WHAT I GUESS WHAT I'M SAYING IS
IN BETWEEN NOW AND THE END
OF THE YEAR I WOULD LIKE TO
FIND OUT NOT ON THE LAST DAY
OF THE YEAR THAT WE'RE BEHIND.
I'D LIKE TO FIND OUT BEFORE AND
FEEL LIKE WE SHOULD BE HALFWAY
DONE WITH IT HALFWAY THROUGH
THE YEAR.
>> WE SHOULD BE EITHER ON TRACK
TO FINISH ELEVEN MILES IN A
YEAR OR WE'RE NOT.
AND THAT IS THE LEVEL OF DETAIL
THAT I'D LIKE TO SEE RIGHT NOW.
>> I'M GOING TO
TRY TO END THIS
TOPIC HERE IN THE INTEREST
OF TIME I LOOK FORWARD I'M SURE
YOU'LL BE SHARING THE PLANS FOR
THE 11 MILES WHERE AND AS THEY
GET INSTALLED WITH THE STAFF
REPORTS.
AND SPEAKING OF LET'S MOVE ON
TO THE STAFF REPORTS AND
UPDATES REGARDING IF YOU RIGHT
BACK TO YOU TO TO GO THROUGH
THAT REAL QUICKLY.
ALL RIGHT.
PAR FOR THE COURSE SOL JUST
SHARE THE HIGHLIGHTS AND YOU'LL
STREET RESURFACING PROJECT WORK
IS SCHEDULED TO BEGIN IN JUNE
AND LAST THROUGH FALL POSSIBLY
INTO TWENTY TWENTY FOUR SQUARE
CHURCH ROAD IS EXPECTED TO BE
COMPLETE IN JULY.
GATTI'S AVENUE RESURFACING FROM
OBSERVATORY TO HIGHLAND IS
CURRENTLY UNDERWAY AND IS
EXPECTED TO ALSO BE COMPLETE IN
JULY.
SOUTH MAIN STREET WATER MAIN
ROAD RESURFACING PHASE ONE
OF THE PROJECT FROM WILLIAM TO
LIBERTY IS NOW COMPLETE AND
WORK ON PHASE TWO WHICH IS FROM
LIBERTY TO HURON IS UNDERWAY.
THE PLAN IS TO BE DONE WITH ALL
THAT WORK BY ARCARE SEVEN
STREET AND GREENVIEW THE FIRST
PUBLIC MEETING ON THE REDESIGN
WAS HELD ON APRIL TWENTY FIFTH
AND THE CONSTRUCTION IS
SCHEDULED FOR TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR GREEN VIEW THE SECOND
PUBLIC MEETING IS TENTATIVELY
SCHEDULED FOR JUNE SEVEN
INCOORDINATION THERE ARE SOME
INTERSECTION IMPROVEMENTS AT
HURON AND SEVEN STREETS THERE.
THERE WAS THE TRAFFIC SIGNAL
MODERNIZATION THERE.
THE PAVEMENT MARKINGS HAVE BEEN
REMOVED IF YOU'RE CURIOUS THEY
WERE MOVED ON MAY 9TH JUST OVER
A WEEK AGO WE WERE ABLE TO GET
A CONTRACTOR IN TO REMOVE
THOSE.
THERE'S ALSO INTERSECTION ON
AND FORTH AND THAT IS GOING TO
UPGRADE THE SIGNAL THERE AND
THAT PROJECT IS CURRENTLY IN
THE DESIGN PHASE EXPECTED TO BE
DONE IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR.
SIMILARLY, MEG IS WORKING ON A
SIGNAL UPGRADE AND GETTING LOST
IN ALL THAT PROJECT IS ALSO IN
THE DESIGN STAGE AND ALSO
SCHEDULED FOR TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR IS REPAIRED TWO HUNDRED
AND NINE STREETLIGHTS SO FAR IN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE TRAFFIC
CALMING PROGRAMS IS THE BIG ONE
YOU JUST TALKED ABOUT WHICH IS
GRANGER.
AND THEN NEXT UP IS GRANDVIEW
HAD ITS FIRST MEETING ON MAY 11
LAST WEEK.
THAT'S FOR GRANDVIEW BETWEEN
JACKSON DEXTER.
WE TALKED A LOT ABOUT THE
TRAFFIC SUBCOMMITTEE.
WE'RE EXCITED SKIP OVER THAT
TRANSPORTATION IMPLEMENTATION
PLAN UPDATE THE NEXT MEETING
OF THE SUBCOMMITTEE IS JUNE
TWENTY SIX.
WE ALREADY TALKED ABOUT THOSE
FINAL DELIVERABLES.
WE TOUCHED ON SPEED MANAGEMENT.
WE ARE WORKING TOWARDS
ESTABLISHING FOCUS GROUPS SO
THOSE POSTCARDS ARE EXPECTED TO
GO OUT.
I THINK THIS WEEK OR NEXT TO
SET UP A SERIES OF OR NO
ACTUALLY I THINK THEY ALREADY
WENT OUT TO SET UP A SERIES
OF FOCUS GROUPS IN JULY.
AGAIN, THE IDEA IS TO JUST GET
SOME ADDITIONAL FEEDBACK ON
THAT PROGRAM, THE ANNUAL
SNAPSHOT.
I DO WANT TO DRAW YOUR
ATTENTION TO US, PETE.
THIS MAYBE SPEAKS A LITTLE BIT
TO WHAT YOU'RE TALKING TO WHICH
IS SOME OF THE WORK THAT'S BEEN
ACCOMPLISHED OVER THE PAST YEAR
FOR TWENTY TWENTY TWO WE HAVE
DEVELOPED A SORT OF INTERACTIVE
DASHBOARD SORT OF SNAPSHOT
REPORT THAT CAN BE FOUND THERE
.
WE'RE GOING TO BE DOING THIS
ANNUALLY TO TO SHOWCASE
INFORMATION IN ADDITION TO SOME
OF THESE REGULAR UPDATES THAT
WE GIVE TO THE TRANSPORTATION
QUESTION AS WELL.
BIKE TO WORK DAY IS THIS FRIDAY
TO REITERATE A POINT THAT
LILYAN MADE AND DURING HER
PRESENTATION AND THAT COMMUTER
CHALLENGE IS ALSO UNDERWAY.
SO AGAIN JUST REEMPHASIZING
THAT MESSAGE VISION ZERO LUNCH
AND LEARN FOR CITY STAFF.
THIRD INSTALLMENT WILL BE ON
JUNE TWENTY FIRST WE WILL HAVE
A PRESENCE AT THE
AFRICAN-AMERICAN FESTIVAL DOING
BIKE RODEOS, GIVING AWAY BIKE
HELMETS AND BIKE LIGHTS AS WELL
.
SO HOPEFULLY WE'LL SEE YOU
THERE.
WE JUST FINISHED OUR LEVEMIR IN
BICYCLISTS SAFE CYCLING COURSE
YESTERDAY WAS A TEN HOUR COURSE
SPREAD OUT OVER TWO DAYS.
WE HAD SEVEN PEOPLE ATTEND SO
IT WAS PRETTY WELL RECEIVED.
MICHIGAN ASSOCIATION
OF PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE
PROFESSIONALS, THE BIKE RIDE
THAT WAS SCHEDULED FOR NEXT
MONDAY I BELIEVE HAS BEEN
RESCHEDULED DATE HAS NOT YET
BEEN DETERMINED.
SO DO MAKE NOTE OF THAT IF YOU
WERE PLANNING ON ATTENDING THAT
PLEASE REACH OUT TO SUZANNE
FLOWERS TO GET ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION.
I HAVE INCLUDED THE CRASH
REPORTS FOR BOTH MARCH AND
APRIL IN THE BACKUP FOR THE
PACKET.
I'LL SWITCH OVER THAT IN JUST A
SECOND TO SHOW THOSE TO YOU.
I WILL SAY I UPLOADED APRIL ONE
ON OR CHRIS ACTUALLY HELPED ME
UPLOAD A FOUR ONE ON MONDAY
BECAUSE IT REVEALED ITSELF WHEN
THE WHEN IT WAS SENT TO
COUNCIL.
>> SO WE GRABBED IT AND THEN
YOU AS WELL.
SO IF YOU AGAIN IF YOU LOOKED
AT THE PACKET ON FRIDAY, YOU
MAY HAVE NOT SEEN THAT THE
APRIL REPORT WAS THERE AS WELL.
PACKARD SPEED LIMITS WERE
REDUCED AND THAT TOOK EFFECT
LAST WEEK.
A WEEK AGO TODAY THEY WERE
REDUCED TO THIRTY FIVE MILES
PER HOUR.
WE ADDED SOME KIND OF WARNINGS
TO MOTORISTS THAT THAT SPEED
HAS BEEN REDUCED WITH SECURITY
FLAGS AND ADVANCED
NOTIFICATIONS WITH MESSAGE
BOARD SIGNS.
AND THEN LASTLY THE NO TURN ON
RED DOWNTOWN SIGNAGE IS
COMPLETE AND AGAIN THAT'S
WORKBENCHES ALL ACCOMPLISHED ON
YOUR END JUST REAL QUICKLY
LOOKING AT THE PEDESTRIAN CRASH
REPORTS AND THE BICYCLIST CRASH
REPORT IN MARCH THERE WAS A
FATALITY ON YOUR ON AT PARK
VIEW.
>> THERE WAS ALSO A SERIOUS
CRASH AT CATHERINE AND INGLES
AND NIXON AND ON PARKWAY AND
THEN FOR A PAROLE THERE WERE NO
PEDESTRIAN CRASHES AND JUST NO
INJURY CRASH FOR CYCLISTS
EITHER
.
ALL RIGHT.
AND THAT CONCLUDES MY UPDATE
NEXT YEAR ON REPORTS AND
COMMISSIONERS WHO SPECIFICALLY
SERVE AS A LIAISON TO ANOTHER
BODY OR ORGANIZATION AND
BUDDIED TO PROVIDE BRIEF
REPORTS.
ARE THERE ANY I CAN'T RAISE MY
HAND.
>> I WAS GOING TO GIVE A BRIEF
THING TO THE COMMISSION ON
DISABILITY ISSUES.
>> SURE.
AND YEAH, THEY JUST BROUGHT
SOME MINOR THINGS TO MY
ATTENTION.
I DON'T KNOW HOW ONE OF THEM IS
AND I ASK THEM FOR MORE
INFORMATION.
THEY WERE COMPLAINING THERE WAS
A COMPLAINT ABOUT A SIDEWALK
GAP ON FILE CHURCH SOMEWHERE
AND SO I ASKED FOR MORE
INFORMATION ON THAT AND UPMEYER
I GUESS THERE GLENCOE HILLS
THERE AND I DON'T KNOW IF WE
COVER THIS BUT THERE'S A BUNCH
OF EITHER E BIKES OR SCOOTERS
THAT THE PEOPLE JUST PUT OUT
THE SIDEWALKS AND MAKE
ACCESSIBILITY PROBLEMS OVER
THERE AND THEY HAVE TO BRING IT
TO YOU.
>> SO THAT'S WHAT I DID.
THANK YOU.
I'M NOT SURE.
>> DID YOU WANT TO RESPOND TO
THAT BECAUSE YOU COULD GO AHEAD
THE THANKS I JUST WANTED TO
MENTION RESPOND TO LARRYS
COMMENT ABOUT CYO SO CHURCH
SIDEWALK GAPS BY THE TIME THIS
PROJECT THAT WE'RE CURRENTLY
WORKING ON RIGHT NOW IS FULLY
COMPLETE, THERE WILL BE NO
REMAINING SIDEWALK GAPS
ALONGSIDE A CHURCH WITHIN THE
CITY'S JURISDICTION OR AT LEAST
THE LAST SECTION OF SIDEWALK ON
THE NORTH SIDE BETWEEN
GREENVIEW AND 7TH MIGHT BE
DELAYED A LITTLE BIT BECAUSE WE
STILL NEED TO WORK OUT ALL
OF THE EASEMENTS COST SHARING
AGREEMENTS WITHIN OUR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS SINCE THEY OWN THAT
PROPERTY SO THE ROAD MAY GET
OPENED AND THEN THE CONTRACTOR
MAY HAVE TO COME BACK LATER TO
INSTALL THAT LAST PIECE
OF SIDEWALK BUT IT IS STILL
COMING.
I SUSPECT THAT THAT'S WHERE IT
WAS.
THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
DEBRA WANTED TO GET A REPORT
OUT FROM COUNCIL.
WE JUST GOT A BUDGET PASSED ON
MONDAY.
>> I TOOK A DEEP DOVE ON
TRANSPORTATION SPENDING AND I
GUESS WILL GO INTO A TON
OF DETAIL BECAUSE YOU ALL GOT
THE PRESENTATION AT OUR LAST
MEETING BUT THEY PASSED VERY
EXCITED TO SEE WE HAVE SIX AND
A HALF MILLION DOLLARS
DEDICATED THIS FISCAL YEAR
SPECIFIC TO ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS WHICH
IS ABOUT A MILLION MORE THAN IN
THE CURRENT FISCAL YEAR THAT
WE'RE IN THINGS LIKE STREET
WEIGHT REPLACEMENT TRAFFIC
CALMING SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
AND REPAIR ROAD CONFIGURATIONS,
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS
AS WELL AS TIME FOR STAFF TO
WORK WITH THE TREE LINE
CONSERVANCY, THE TREE LINE
DRILL AND AND OBVIOUSLY RAYMOND
,CORRECT ME IF I GET ANY
OF THIS WRONG BUT I UNDERSTAND
THAT THAT AMOUNT THAT I JUST
DOESN'T COUNT FEDERAL GRANTS
AND EARMARKS THAT WE'RE
PURSUING FOR ADDITIONAL THINGS
SO THAT RIGHT.
>> YES, I BELIEVE THAT'S
POSSIBLE.
I ALSO WANTED TO JUST KIND
OF BRIEFLY FOLLOW UP ON THE
FIFTY ONE RESOLUTION THAT THIS
COMMISSION PASSED AFTER OUR
LAST MEETING PRETTY MUCH
IMMEDIATELY COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGS AND I SET UP A MEETING
WITH THE CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER TO REALLY UNDERSTAND
HOW THE ACT FIFTY ONE FUNDS ARE
BEING USED AND WHAT
OPPORTUNITIES THERE MIGHT BE
AND SHARED THIS WITH MOLLY AND
BRETT AND MEGAN AND I WON'T YOU
KNOW, THIS DOESN'T NEED TO GO
ON LONG BUT BASICALLY IT WAS
REALLY HARD TO TEASE APART WHAT
WE SPEND THE FIFTY ONE FUNDS ON
BECAUSE THERE'S A TON
OF OVERLAP IN TERMS OF BOTH
CAPITAL PROJECTS AS WELL AS
MAINTENANCE
IN THE
INFRASTRUCTURE BECAUSE SO MANY
OF THESE PROJECTS ARE
INTEGRATOR.
SO SOMETIMES IT'S NOT EVEN
REALLY TECHNICALLY I THINK
TRACKED SEPARATELY.
SO EXAMPLES OF CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS THAT HAVE
OCCURRED.
FIFTY ONES IN THEM THAT ARE NOT
PART OF THE FIVE PERCENT THAT
SPECIFICALLY SET ASIDE OUR ROAD
CONFIGURATION PROJECTS
ACCESSIBLE CROSSWALK SIGNALS
SOME ANNUAL SIDEWALK REPAIR AND
CURB RAMP PROGRAM THINGS JUST
TO NAME A FEW AND WE HAD A
DIFFICULT TIME SEEING HOW WE
WERE GOING TO INCREASE THAT
WITHOUT POTENTIALLY CANNIBALIZE
SAYING BASICALLY THINGS THAT WE
WANT TO SEE FOR ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION.
SO MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT
BASICALLY THE FIVE PERCENT
LIMIT YOU REALLY ONLY FEEL IT
WHEN THERE'S A STRICTLY NON
MOTORIZED TRAVEL PROJECT AND
IT'S BIG AND AN EXAMPLE OF THIS
WAS A FEW YEARS AGO THE ALLEN
CREEK BERM PROJECT WAS FUNDED
THROUGH FIFTY ONE.
THERE WEREN'T ENOUGH FUNDS AND
THE FIVE PERCENT SO THEY
TEMPORARILY RAISED IT I THINK
FOR THAT YEAR FOR AN ADDITIONAL
ONE MILLION DOLLARS TO COMPLETE
.
SO BASICALLY OUR CONCLUSION WAS
THAT IF WE SET ASIDE A LARGER
PERCENT BASED ON HOW IT'S KIND
OF BEING SPENT AND ALLOCATED
NOW THE IT WOULD COME AT THE
EXPENSE OF SOME CONTRACTED
SERVICES SUCH AS PAVEMENT
MARKINGS, CAPITAL ROADS,
PROJECTS THAT WILL HAVE
SIGNIFICANT PEDESTRIAN CYCLING
AND TRAFFIC CALMING ELEMENTS.
ONE EXAMPLE THE HILL AND STATE
PROJECT ERHART PROJECTS THINGS
LIKE THAT.
WE CAN'T MAKE CUTS TO THE
BUDGET ROAD PROJECTS SO IN
CONCLUSION MY KIND
OF ASSESSMENT AFTER THIS WAS
THAT WE SHOULD KEEP AN EYE ON
IT BUT IT WASN'T REALLY SEEING
OPPORTUNITIES TO MAKE EFFECTIVE
USE OF THIS IN OUR BUDGET TO
INCREASE OUR NON MOTORIZED
WITHOUT KIND OF CANNIBALIZING
THINGS THAT ARE ALSO FOR ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR THAT
EXPLANATION OR ANY OTHER LATEST
ON REPORTS ON COMMISSIONER
MEMBER COMMISSIONER
COMMUNICATIONS.
LET'S SEE ALL COMMISSIONERS ARE
READY TO PROVIDE REPORTS AND
UPDATES.
ALSO NEED TO TAKE A MOMENT TO
THINK THROUGH THAT.
I THINK THE LAST MONTH WAS HER
LAST MEETING ON THE COMMISSION
SO WE HAVE NOW A SECOND
OPENING.
BUT THANK YOU TO SAYS THAT FOR
HER SERVICE TO THIS COMMISSION
AND GRATEFUL FOR HER
CONTRIBUTIONS DURING HER TIME.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S SEE, RAYMOND.
THERE'S A NOTE HERE THAT YOU
BOTH YOU AND NICK WILL BE
ABSENT FOR THE JUNE MEETING BUT
WE'LL HAVE OTHER SUPPORT.
I'M SURE YOU GUYS WILL TAKE
CARE OF THAT CALL FOR AGENDA
ITEMS.
JUST GO AHEAD.
IF YOU HAVE AGENDA ITEMS THAT
YOU'D LIKE TO SEE ADDED, PLEASE
EMAIL THEM TO RAYMOND AND OR
MYSELF AND OR MEGHAN.
NEXT MEETING WILL BE HELD ON
WEDNESDAY, JUNE TWENTY FIRST
TWO THOUSAND TWENTY THREE AT
SEVEN P.M. AGAIN THE VIRTUAL
MEETING AND IF THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS WE WILL ADJOURN OUR
MAY 17TH MEETING NO OBJECTIONS
THEN THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR PATIENCE AND
FOR GOOD WILL LATER.
>> HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.
THANKS EVERYBODY.